Itireleng Community Healthcare Centre vaccination site on 8 June 2021 in Soweto, Gauteng. (Photo: Gallo Images / Papi Morake) The Western Cape has declared that it has officially entered the third wave of Covid-19 infections, according to both Premier Alan Winde and provincial health department head Dr Keith Cloete, on Thursday, 10 June. They announced that the Cape Town International Convention Centre (ICC) will be opened as a mass vaccination site. The centre was transformed into a Covid-19 field hospital previously in May 2020. The site will be able to administer 5,000 doses daily once it becomes active in a few weeks’ time. Read this report by Suné Payne. In the Northern Cape, some elderly residents of Upington are missing vaccination appointments because travelling to the sole vaccination site by taxi is too expensive. More than 10,000 people have received their first Pfizer Covid-19 vaccine dose. Read this report by Selby Nomnganga. Meanwhile, Cabinet has “welcomed” the World Health Organization’s (WHO’s) validation of the Sinovac vaccine for emergency Covid use. Earlier this week, the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority chairperson Professor Helen Rees said the regulator was reviewing the Sinovac vaccine. The regulator now has the same dossier of data as the WHO and that will quicken the process, she explained. FNB and its partner Clicks have encouraged those over 60 years old to register for the vaccine. FNB said Clicks has started vaccinations at 51 sites across the country. The pharmacy chain requires proof of registration and medical aid details from customers before vaccination can go ahead. The bank has committed its 600 branches to helping customers to register for the vaccine. They need to bring ID and a proof of address to register, using the bank’s mobile devices usually reserved for banking services. DM/MC "Information pertaining to Covid-19, vaccines, how to control the spread of the virus and potential treatments is ever-changing. Under the South African Disaster Management Act Regulation 11(5)(c) it is prohibited to publish information through any medium with the intention to deceive people on government measures to address COVID-19. We are therefore disabling the comment section on this article in order to protect both the commenting member and ourselves from potential liability. Should you have additional information that you think we should know, please email letters@dailymaverick.co.za"