File photo: Nicolette Kinnear, wife of murdered Charles Kinnear, with sons (left) Casleigh, and (right) Carlisle, addresses the media outside the Bellville Regional Court. (Photo: Vincent Cruywagen) Eight months after the murder of Lieutenant-Colonel Charl Kinnear outside his home, police security has been withdrawn from his widow, Nicolette Kinnear, and their two sons. A letter signed by the acting unit commander of the Anti-Gang Unit (AGU), Karl Wienand, was handed to Kinnear at 5pm on Monday, 1 June, at her family home in Bishop Lavis, Cape Town. Kinnear confirmed she had received the letter. Charl Kinnear was an AGU section leader before his murder in September 2020. Police security for the decorated detective was withdrawn in December 2019. Three attempts on Kinnear’s life were made in November 2019, the final one involving a failed hand grenade attack. Major-General André Lincoln, head of the AGU, asked members of his unit to guard Kinnear’s house after the incident. They were removed on 19 December 2019. Ten months later, Kinnear was shot dead outside his home. The letter handed to Nicolette Kinnear reveals that the decision to withdraw her security was on the instruction of the acting provincial commissioner, Major-General Thembisile Patekile. Members of the AGU have been escorting Kinnear and her two sons, Casleigh and Carlisle, to and from court for appearances by those accused of aiding and abetting the murder of her husband. Kinnear has attended the Amaal Jantjies hand grenade matter in the Parow Regional Court, as well as proceedings at the Bellville Regional Court where murder accused Zane Kilian applied for bail, and at the Blue Downs Regional Court where alleged underworld kingpin Nafiz Modack appeared alongside Kilian, Jacques Cronje, Ricardo Morgan and AGU Sergeant Ashley Tabisher on 62 charges. On Wednesday, Kinnear said AGU members were still providing security Asked for comment, she said: “I don’t want the security measures of my family to be discussed in the public domain. I’m also in the dark and cannot elaborate much about the letter.” She indicated to Maverick Citizen that once the security measures at her house had been officially withdrawn, she would take up the matter “at the highest level”. In papers during the bail application of murder accused and former rugby player Kilian, the prosecution presented evidence showing that Kilian had compiled a profile containing personal details and photographs of Kinnear and his wife. This was handed to a third person, who has since been identified as Modack. Nicolette Kinnear’s phone was also tracked by Kilian. The tracking of Charl Kinnear’s phone led the shooter to Kinnear’s house, where one of his sons witnessed the gunman shooting his father at close range. With the shooter still not apprehended, the family fears he may return. Police spokesperson Brigadier Novela Potelwa said: “Issues of security and/or guard duties for certain individuals as a result of an identified threat are best not discussed in the public domain. “It is therefore recommended that the affected parties raise whatever concerns they have about their safety and security with the relevant authority within SAPS.” Protection of police officers is also a contentious issue regarding dismissed Major-General Jeremy Vearey, the former head of detectives in the Western Cape. Vearey was dismissed after he criticised National Commissioner Khehla Sitole on social media. Papers relating to the Kinnear murder indicate that Vearey’s phone was among 22 allegedly tracked by Kilian. Security has been provided to Vearey since Kinnear’s murder. Police officers providing protection services to the investigating officer in the 20 Terrible Josters gang matter being heard in the Western Cape High Court told Maverick Citizen that Vearey was still receiving protection. On Thursday, 3 June, the Police and Prisons Civil Rights Union (Popcru) will meet in Johannesburg to deliberate on the Vearey matter. On the agenda is the matter of his protection and a litigation process to have the dismissal decision set aside. Popcru spokesperson Richard Mamabolo said the matter has been referred to the Safety and Security Sectoral Bargaining Council. DM/MC Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet