“In this changing world, trends are emerging that are set to transform investment markets globally. Four ‘megatrends’ are widely recognized as macroeconomic forces that will fundamentally shape the world going forward. In so doing, they are set to have a profound influence on how we address some of society’s biggest challenges and they will create immense opportunity. Importantly, thematic investing can better position portfolios for the future,” Kenny Rabson, CEO of Discovery Invest, said. “The South African equity market, which represents less than 1% of the global equity market, does not offer much exposure to these global megatrends, so the new Discovery Global Megatrends Fund is an option for unlocking these opportunities and provide diversification in their portfolios,” Rabson added. The Discovery Global Megatrends Fund is available on both Discovery Invest’s local and global platforms. The Fund provides clients with unique exposure to these four global megatrends by allocating investments equally in four Goldman Sachs Asset Management equity portfolios, each aligned to one of these megatrends. Oliver Rahe, Head of Third-Party Distribution for the Middle East and Africa at Goldman Sachs Asset Management, said: “We are delighted to work with Discovery to bring this innovative investment solution to clients in South Africa and beyond. We believe traditional benchmarks are flawed, meaning allocating capital tied to them can mean investing in yesterday’s winners rather than tomorrows. The Megatrend portfolio is designed to access returns that are not correlated to traditional global equity strategies that South African investors already own, and therefore may be complementary to clients’ existing allocations”. DM/BM  Disclaimer: By investing in either the ZAR or USD version of the Discovery Global Megatrends Fund, clients will not be investing directly in the Goldman Sachs Asset Management equity portfolios. The funds are investment portfolios underlying an investment linked insurance policy issued, or underwritten, by Discovery Life Limited, with the ZAR fund allocating to the underlying Goldman Sachs Asset Management equity portfolios and the USD fund being equity-linked notes which Discovery Life International holds to match each policy with allocations to the underlying Goldman Sachs Asset Management equity portfolios. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet