“The school has got to consciously go out and look for Black teachers to give our children pride to actually look and know that there are Black people who are excelling in the education sphere,” Kganyago told broadcaster eNCA on Monday while at the protest. Reports of a lack of transformation at the school have spurred protests, as have allegations by Black students that they experienced discrimination. In a May 26 statement, the school said it was revisiting its hair policy, diversity training and the structure of its board. pic.twitter.com/ImVnW4FJ6s — Cornwall Hill College (@CornwallHill) May 26, 2021 While schools and cities haven’t officially been divided by race since the end of White-minority rule in 1994, disparities in wealth and an apartheid strategy of placing so-called townships, where many Blacks were compelled to live, on the periphery of cities, has meant that inequities persist. That has resulted in student bodies that don’t reflect the country’s demographics. Apartheid laws meant that Blacks and other racial groups that were discriminated against were given an inferior education and barred from certain professions. That has resulted in unequal access to post-school training and contributed to the slow pace of transformation in workplaces ranging from schools to banks. Reserve bank governor Lesetja Kganyanyo has joined the group of disgruntled parents at the #CornwallHillCollege, to protest over allegations of racism. pic.twitter.com/o4R55qFksB — POWER987News (@POWER987News) May 31, 2021 In recent years, anti-racism protests at schools have been driven by non-inclusive dress-code rules about natural hair, the wearing of religious symbols. Last year reports emerged that invitations to a private gathering for a Cape-Town school’s final-year students had mainly been extended to White pupils. Cornwall Hill College charges annual fees of as much as 93,550 rand ($6,793), putting it out of the reach of most South Africans. In 2015 employed White South Africans on average earned three times more than Blacks with jobs. South Africa spends about 14% of its budget on primary and secondary education at government schools, more than on any other expenditure item. However, the persistent poor-quality of education in historically disadvantaged communities that serve the majority of its children continues to weigh on outcomes in a country where almost a third of the workforce is unemployed. Its quality of schooling was ranked 114th out of 137 countries by the World Economic Forum in 2017, the last time the organization published the measure in its Global Competitiveness Index. The school system is held back by a lack of knowledge among educators, an uneven availability of textbooks and labor unions that “fervently resist any policy to monitor teachers by blocking accountability reforms,” the International Monetary Fund said in a 2019 report. Read More: The state of South African schools Black staff at the historically-White South African Reserve Bank made up 76% of its total workforce in 2020, compared with about 65% six years earlier, according to central bank data, when Kganyago was appointed governor. “What is important is for the school to publicly acknowledge that racism is a systemic problem at Cornwall Hill College and to deal with that,” Kganyago said in a later interview with the same broadcaster. “I have had the situation of my daughter who experienced racism at the school and the kind of things that were said are not worth repeating on a public platform.” Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 2 My advice is for those parents who want racially based teacher quotas in place, is for them to get involved in the recruitment and appointment of teachers and their subsequent performance management. The outcomes for children should be colour blind, as those very same parents demand value for money. And once again skill, knowledge, expertise and experience is not measures of capabilities.. The only measure is the color of your skin… Deal with the racism experienced and do not automatically assumed a more diverse employment base will by default resolve racism issues.