Tannie Kuruman's Melktert. Image: Peter van Straten MAMA MARIA! QUEEN OF THE LOVE ADVICE AND RECIPE COLUMN OF THE KLEIN KAROO GAZETTE You have much help for the people who write to you and I am glad. I can give help for love and other problems. I have herbs and powers from God that can help with: *Love remote control *Bring back lost lover in 1 hour *To lock lover not to fool around and to be at your feet and listen to you only *Evil spirits and tokoloshes *Sexual problems in all sizes you want *Big and strong manhood enlargement 20 or 30cm – results in 40 minutes *Powerful lotto and casino lucky ring *Short boys/rats to bring money into your account *Magic stick to finish unfinished job *All diseases and pregnancy *Pig lice *Magic wallet attracts money and jobs *Clear debt in 1 hour *Sendwana oil protection *Rainbow water for luck *Bad dreams and bewitching from the dead *All other problems and wishes Come to Mama Bolo and you will be helped.
100% GUARANTEED. PAY ONLY WITH SATISFACTION She gave a cell phone number. My own problems were covered by ‘Sexual problems of all sizes’ and ‘Bad dreams and bewitching from the dead’. If I had not already phoned the satanic mechanic that morning, who knows? I might have called her. I carried on reading the letter. She didn’t have a love problem of her own, but she did want recipe advice … Mama Maria, I am asking your help to cook pudding with milk. I did get a cow as payment from a very satisfied customer. I gave the cow rainbow water to drink and it makes too much milk. I can make nice sour cream and cream cheese, but I want some sweet things also. You Afrikaans mamas know how to make nice milk and cheese puddings. Tell me some. Thank you and God bless you MAMA BOLO
EXPERT AND QUEEN OF MUTI I gave the Queen of Medicines Tannie Kuruman’s melktert recipe. I’ve tasted many milk tarts, and Tannie K’s is the most excellent. And I also gave Mama Bolo the recipe for the best cheesecake in the world – which my friend Candy from New York had sent me. Just thinking about it made my tongue want to melt in my mouth. *** Tannie Kuruman’s Melktert Before Sally Andrew found the perfect recipe, she made one that was rather disgusting, but she found a good way to make good use of it.  Crust Sift the flour, icing sugar and salt together.
Add the butter and egg yolks and cut into the flour with a knife. Using your fingers, knead very gently until the butter is mixed in. Wrap the dough in cling film and leave to rest for 30 minutes in the fridge.
Roll out the dough on a floured surface and fit into a well-greased 24cm pie dish.
Prick the base with a fork.
Bake for 15–20 minutes at 200 ºC. Filling Ingredients A Ingredients B Ingredients C Topping Cinnamon sugar Heat ingredients A (2 cups milk, butter, salt and sugar) in a saucepan, stirring until the sugar has dissolved.
Mix ingredients B (1 cup milk, flour and corn starch) in a bowl, and pour A onto B.
Mix well and return to the saucepan.
Cook the mixture, stirring all the time, for about 5 minutes until it has thickened and the floury taste has gone.
Beat ingredients C (eggs and vanilla extract) in a bowl. Slowly whisk the hot mixture into C and mix well. Return to the saucepan and cook gently until thick (2–3 minutes).
Pour the custard into the baked pastry crust and let it cool and set. Sprinkle on lots of cinnamon sugar before serving. Tips To make cinnamon sugar, mix equal parts of ground cinnamon and brown sugar. You can dust the top of the milk tart with just cinnamon instead of cinnamon sugar. DM/ ML/ TGIF This letter and Tannie Maria’s recipe are an excerpt from Recipes for Love and Murder. This sublime melktert recipe came to Tannie Maria’s author, Sally Andrew, from Martin Mossmer’s great-great-grandmother, Ouma Alie Visser. You can buy Sally Andrew’s books here. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 2 Darn Tannie, this looks good, real good. But you know, right now, i am simply dying for a half chicken, hot, from Nando’s. Been 14 years since I have had such, living 200 kilometers from the nearest Nando’s. This is not an advert…simple craving, such as I now have for your melktert Tannie, I am from Montagu, klein karoo, but still a bit far from Kuruman