But times have changed, and so has Wimpy. While they still offer the same casual, family-friendly dining, they’re taking another step towards making everyone feel welcome. And the first order of business is to talk local. Back in the 80s, they were the first sit-down restaurant to officially welcome all South Africans, long before the idea of the Rainbow Nation gained traction. Wimpy was also the first local restaurant to introduce a braille menu, but that’s not the only step they took to make visually impaired diners feel welcome. Wimpy also created special burgers for SA’s largest institutions for the visually impaired. The sesame seeds on each of the special burgers were arranged in braille to give diners a description of what they were about to dig into. What might seem like a small gesture to some, went a long way to give people a multi-sensory dining experience that able-bodied people often take for granted. Wimpy has taken another step to make all its diners feel at home. Their new menu can now be viewed in all 11 official languages, another first for a South African restaurant franchise.  There’s nothing more welcoming than speaking to someone in their language. It’s akin to rolling out a red carpet fashioned from the words and phrases used to connect with those closest to them. ‘If you talk to a man in a language he understands, that goes to his head. If you talk to him in his own language, that goes to his heart.’ This quote is commonly attributed to Nelson Mandela, but recent research suggests he was misquoted. Regardless of who those words originally belonged to; the sentiment remains the same: Language is a powerful tool for creating authentic connections. To view the new menu in your language, scan the QR code on the front of the menu or follow this link: https://wimpy.co.za/choose-your-language DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet