Beans and ribs soup. (Photo: Tony Jackman) Ingredients 2 kg lamb or mutton ribs 3 large onions, chopped 2 carrots, grated 3 leeks, sliced finely 1 stick celery, diced 3 Tbsp butter 4 rosemary sprigs 3 x 400 g cans sugar beans 1  400 g can black beans 1  400 g can red kidney beans 1  400 g can butter beans 2 Tbsp ground coriander ½ tsp nutmeg 3 or 4 litres cold water Salt and black pepper to taste Added milk (optional) Method My recipe involves three stages: roasting the bones with the onions for two hours; transferring them to a large, heavy pot, adding all the vegetables and herbs and filling it to with water to cover, then boiling that down by half (the stock phase), finally adding the beans, bringing it to a boil, then reducing it to a simmer and cooking for another hour or more. Roast the ribs and the halved or quartered onions for two hours. Remove from the oven and leave to cool so that excess fat will settle on the surface and can be removed. Chop the roasted onions and sauté in a big pot in butter with the carrots, celery and leeks. Add all the ribs and cover with water. Add the rosemary, coriander and nutmeg and stir. Bring to a boil and reduce the liquid by half. This should take an hour or more. Use tongs to remove the ribs to a large tray with a wooden board on it (so that the tray will catch any juices that drip off the edge of the board). Leave it to cool enough to handle the ribs. Pick out all the bones you can find, then cut the rib meat into small pieces and return to the pot. Add 1 can of sugar beans, the black, red and butter beans, the rosemary, coriander and nutmeg, season with salt and plenty of black pepper, and bring to a boil. Reduce to a simmer and cook gently for an hour. Scoop off the fat from the roasting pan and discard. Ladle some stock into the pan and scrape the bottom to retrieve the flavour, and pour it into the stock. Only add the remaining two cans of sugar beans now, and cook for another half hour. This, as Sonette explained, is because sugar beans remain intact more than other varieties do. She uses only sugar beans in her recipe (so you can do that) but I wanted the extra texture that red kidney, black and broad beans bring. If the soup becomes too thick, stir in enough milk to bring it to the consistency you want, and cook for five minutes more. DM/TGIFood To enquire about Tony Jackman’s book, foodSTUFF (Human & Rousseau) please email him at tony@dailymaverick.co.za SUBSCRIBE: Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet