Ajay and Atul Gupta in Midrand on 4 March 2011. (Photo: Gallo Images/City Press/Muntu Vilakazi) The United Arab Emirates – widely regarded as the new home of the Gupta family, including fugitive brothers Atul and Rajesh and their wives Chetali and Arti – has ratified an extradition treaty with South Africa. Daily Maverick understands this was done recently, though indications are that South Africa is not brimming with excitement – just yet. The ceremonial exchange of the treaty is yet to take place. Comment from the Department of International Relations was not immediately available.  UAE Extradition Treaty  News of the ratification comes as South African law enforcement has managed to take one criminal case featuring the Gupta name to court. Atul and Rajesh, along with their wives, are accused with former Transnet board member Iqbal Sharma in a R24.9-million fraud and money laundering case in the Free State. Last week, the NPA also announced it had approached Interpol for help in executing warrants of arrest for the two Gupta brothers and their wives. This came roughly five years since the #Guptaleaks first emerged. Interestingly, South Africa has not uttered a word about the signing of the treaty. Instead, the UAE embassy in Pretoria released a statement announcing it on Wednesday, 9 June 2021. Ratification is usually the final box to tick in the drawn-out process between two countries, but the UAE has required a tremendous amount of time to make this treaty a reality. This is especially so given the pressure around the Gupta family and how much of their business dealings in South Africa has been a daily feature of the State Capture Commission since August 2018. Negotiations for the treaty began in 2010 and took eight years to be signed. South Africa took the treaty to Parliament within four months of its signing to kick-start the ratification process. The ratification by the UAE comes after nearly three years of legal wrangling, political tap dancing and, at times, a rather unbecoming diplomatic tone from South Africa. In November 2020, Justice and Corrections Minister Ronald Lamola – addressing MPs – said the UAE was not cooperating in efforts to have the Guptas extradited to South Africa to face the music over their alleged involvement in an estimated R50-billion in State Capture crimes. While the treaty will become an effective tool in the fight against crime, some may view the UAE’s sudden resolution of outstanding issues – for a long time it included translation of the document – as a way to manage its reputation in the international community. The Guptas have gained significant notoriety on the international stage over the years. The three Gupta brothers and their South African kingpin, Salim Essa, were described as members of a significant corruption network when the US Treasury, under its Global Magnitsky Act, slapped them with financial sanctions. Hain/Zondo Former British MP Lord Peter Hain too criticised the UAE during his testimony at the Zondo Commission in November 2019. “It seems to me, either the government, under the rule of Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum, is wilfully sheltering a family that has looted astronomical amounts from South African taxpayers, or the South African authorities don’t have the will or capacity to bring them to book”. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 2 It seems to me, either the government, under the rule of Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum, is willfully sheltering a family that has looted astronomical amounts from South African taxpayers, or the South African authorities don’t have the will or capacity to bring them to book. Or both. Curb your enthusiasm. They will relocate in time.