The move shows China is following through with a March vow to expand its legal toolkit as it battles the U.S. on a range of fronts, from allegations of human-rights abuses in the western Xinjiang region to limitations on the types of technology China can import. The Trump administration sanctioned at least 45 Chinese officials over their role in Beijing tightening its grip on Hong Kong and in setting policies for Xinjiang, including 15 members of the NPC. The Chinese government hit back with sanctions of its own, including punishments aimed at Senators Marco Rubio of Florida and Ted Cruz of Texas, but those lacked bite given the dollar’s dominance in international finance. That spurred China’s ruling Communist Party to seek other ways to get even with foreign governments and firms for what it sees as interference in domestic matters. In January, the Ministry of Commerce issued rules that would allow China’s courts to punish global companies for complying with foreign sanctions, although the ministry provided few details. “This is about reducing U.S. hegemonic thinking and actions,” Mei Xinyu, part of a research group under the Ministry of Commerce in Beijing, said of the proposed law. “It is also a warning for countries that follow the U.S. in encroaching on China’s rights and a reminder that there is a price to pay for unjustifiable actions toward China.” See: Blacklists, Trade and More U.S.-China Flashpoints: QuickTake Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi used an address in March to warn U.S. President Joe Biden not to meddle in China’s affairs, and called on the U.S. to end penalties on Chinese firms. The NPC’s 175-member standing committee is meeting until Thursday in Beijing. The Global Times said it expects the draft law to be put up for a vote soon. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet