Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo. (Photo: Gallo Images / Veli Nhlapo) The Commission of Inquiry into State Capture has cost South Africa almost R1-billion, but it has saved the country billions more, said Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo at a media briefing on Wednesday, 30 June. Zondo confirmed the current costs of the almost three-year probe stand at almost R1-billion – but this is roughly equal to the R864-million which McKinsey has repaid to Eskom and SAA after negotiations with his commission, he said. “(Ultimately), the commission’s work can’t be measured in rands and cents,” Zondo said, adding that it had to be measured by a more substantive outcome. “(We have) to make sure looting doesn’t happen again. If the looting repeats itself, it would be a serious indictment on us as a country.” The commission’s secretary, Professor Itumeleng Mosala, said the commission’s work had exposed the theft of many billions more. Paul Holden’s series in Daily Maverick provides a detailed account of how the State Capture loot was assembled and distributed. Zondo said the commission would hand over a final report to President Cyril Ramaphosa by the end of August or the end of September at the latest.  This week, the high court granted a final three-month extension to the inquiry. Witnesses have told the commission that South Africa’s effort to get under the skin of State Capture and to seek ways to end it, is unprecedented. But questions have been raised by Cabinet ministers, the public and opposition parties about how long the commission is sitting and how expensive it has been for the public purse. Zondo also revealed that investigators and lawyers have worked without pay for parts of this year, although the Department of Justice, which manages the commission’s budgets, had recently made payments. “There may be some outstanding payments for April, May and June,” he said, adding that the commission “must complete its work properly or it would all have been fruitless and wasteful expenditure”. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 12 As a taxpayer I don’t begrudge this IF it enables recovery of stolen money AND helps put the thieves behind bars. It is probably the only non-corrupt aspect our taxes paid for Add the tab to the State Capture billions owed the country and its people. DCJ Zondo shouldn’t be the one apologising. If Z gets a dozen high profile people into prison – worth it. But is it true that commissioners and senior resources get paid R60k per day? That’s R1.3m per MONTH. My understanding is that many good advocates invoice over R1 million a month. Good money if you can get it but it means winning cases to get briefed. It also means very long hours preparing for cases which doesn’t leave them with much private time. the money is nothing if we see politicians and corrupt business people in orange overalls as we will recover the money from these creeps anyhow or some of it. If Magashule,Malema and Zuma all end in jail this Commussion was worth double the 1bn. Add about 200 others, One thing is sure, defence lawyers are going to make a lot of money. Just wonder how long is the queue for Mpofu, though he looses all his cases It needs be wrapped up as quickly as possible so that Cyril gets the report and the NPA are able to move on the corrupt before the next ANC campaign season gets underway. The main rotten apples need to be removed from the barrel as soon as possible. Not a single arrest last week when 2,000 EFF supporters defied the law and marched in Pretoria. Why would Zondo not issue a new subpoena against Zuma? Rinse, repeat. Second offense for contempt of court would be – another two years prison? Can maybe do another two subpoenas before commission ends. May the Lord help us all : the patron saint of God appointed duties, the worst advocate in SA, Ms Mbekwane says she aligns herself with the dissenting judges in Zuma sentence. She really does think she is a judge instead of a pretty awful practioner of the law. Shut up, to quote your fellow legal eagle with fluffed tail feathers.