By Niclas Rolander
Jun 17, 2021, 12:48 PM – Updated on Jun 17, 2021, 2:06 PM
Word Count: 240 The Left Party, which isn’t part of the government, appears to have the backing of the Moderates, the Christian Democrats and the Sweden Democrats to oust Lofven’s minority coalition, according to social media posts and local media. The challenge is turning into the most serious threat yet to Sweden’s government, which was formed after an inconclusive election result in 2018. The dispute centers on plans by Lofven’s Social Democrats to let landlords charge market rates for new rental apartments. The Left has slammed the proposal, which it says let’s down the tenants the government should be protecting. The conservative parties, meanwhile, are just eager to see Lofven go, even though they traditionally embrace deregulation. A no confidence vote is now set to be held on June 21. If successful, it would topple the coalition of Social Democrats and Greens that’s ruled for 2 1/2 years with the support of two center-right parties. But from the get-go, the alliance has been an uneasy one. Ultimately, the latest development shows how frayed Swedish politics have become since the emergence of the anti-immigration Sweden Democrats prevented the country’s traditional blocs from forming their own majorities. The Sweden Democrats hold just under one-fifth of the seats in the country’s parliament. (Retops to reflect growing opposition to Lofven)
© 2021 Bloomberg L.P. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 1 Seems not even the socialists want to support emigres who contribute nothing