Makazole and Lukhanyo join fellow Discovery Vitality ambassadors Chad le Clos, Wayde van Niekerk, Caster Semenya, Lucas Radebe and Kgothatso ‘KG’ Montjane who motivate and inspire individuals to make healthier choices in support of the Group’s ambition to make people healthier and enhance and protect their lives. “We are honoured to welcome Makazole and Lukhanyo and to share their stories of growing up in rural Eastern Cape, facing many challenges, at times personal loss and, despite this, going on to make Springbok history. Their personal journeys are an inspiration to all South Africans and their desire to contribute positively to society match Discovery’s aim to be a force for social good,” says Firoze Bhorat, Chief Marketing Officer of Discovery.  The natural talent and tenacity of these two players have seen them rise from rural beginnings, born just 37 km apart in rural Eastern Cape, not attending any of the traditional rugby feeder schools, to becoming leading Springboks whose integrity and fortitude have won the hearts and support of fans worldwide. More than teammates, they have become close friends and have worked to make society better by being strong role models and jointly campaigning against gender-based violence in South Africa. Mapimpi (31), a winger known for his incredible speed and agility was the second-highest try scorer overall at the 2019 Rugby World Cup, with six tries. He has quickly become known as one of the strongest finishers for the Springboks, an extraordinary achievement considering he only started in Super Rugby in 2017 after a time with East London’s Border Bulldogs U19 team. He joined the Springbok squad for the first time in June 2018. Am (28), a centre, gained his rugby break in 2016, being picked by the Sharks. He also spent time at Border Bulldogs. After helping the Sharks reach the quarter-finals of the 2017, 2018 and 2019 Super Rugby seasons he was named captain for the 2020 season, taking over from retiring Tendai “Beast” Mtawarira. He debuted for the Springboks in 2017 and produced the pass that led to Mapimpi’s historic try in the final. “Makazole and Lukhanyo’s stories serve as powerful motivation to people of all backgrounds –particularly young people, who have the most to gain from strong role models – to become more active, and to rise above challenges to realise their dreams,” says Iona Maclean, Head of Experiential Marketing at Discovery. “It is also exciting to have them join our global movement to make 100 million people 20% more active by 2025,” she added. Mapimpi and Am said in a joint statement that they are elated to expand their reach by teaming up with Discovery: “We both care deeply about the wellbeing of our communities. That’s why we’re joining Discovery’s efforts to promote mental, physical and societal health. We look forward to encouraging all South Africans to make healthy living and physical activity a priority every day.” DM    About Discovery Discovery Limited is a South African-founded financial services organisation that operates in the healthcare, life assurance, short-term insurance, savings and investment and wellness markets. Since inception in 1992, Discovery has been guided by a clear core purpose – to make people healthier and to enhance and protect their lives. This has manifested in its globally recognised Vitality Shared-Value insurance model, active in 27 markets with over 20 million members. The model is exported and scaled through the Global Vitality Network, an alliance of some of the largest insurers across key markets including AIA (Asia), Ping An (China), Generali (Europe), Sumitomo (Japan), John Hancock (US), Manulife (Canada) and Vitality Life & Health (UK, wholly owned). Discovery trades on the Johannesburg Securities Exchange as DSY. Follow us on Twitter @Discovery_SA About Vitality Vitality is the largest global platform for behaviour change, underpinning the insurance products of leading insurers worldwide, with more than 20 million members in 30 markets. The Vitality model, established by Discovery Limited in South Africa, has been incentivising behaviour change amongst its clients for over 25 years. Vitality creates shared value by combining behavioural economics, clinical science, and financial incentives to encourage and reward members for taking steps to improve their health. The model began with a focus on health and wellness, and has expanded to include short-term insurance, investments and financial wellness. For more information, please visit the Vitality Website or email the Discovery Media Relations Team.  Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet