Members of the environmental movement Extinction Rebellion pose as G7 leaders during a demonstration in St Ives, Cornwall, Britain, on 13 June 2021. Embodying the saying ‘all mouth and no trousers’ through costume and partial nudity, activists aimed at illustrating that the G7 leaders were making promises on climate change, but taking no real action. (Photo: EPA-EFE / Jon Rowley) Novavax’s vaccine candidate showed strong efficacy against the coronavirus, including mutated variants, in a large trial. The head of the World Health Organization warned of an urgent need for more shots, especially in Africa. UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson announced an extension of pandemic restrictions until July 19 because of a surge in the Delta variant. At the same time, vaccines from Pfizer and AstraZeneca were found to be highly effective after two doses at preventing hospitalisation of those infected with that variant, according to health authorities in England. The Group of Seven backed Japan’s plan to proceed with the Olympic Games in Tokyo as a symbol of global unity in the battle against Covid-19. Meanwhile, the group fell short of a pledge to donate a billion additional vaccine doses to developing nations. Key developments: WHO chief cites urgent need for more shots World Health Organization Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus welcomed the Group of Seven’s recent pledge of 870 million Covid-19 vaccine doses, but said more shots are needed quickly. The steep increase in Covid-19 cases in Africa is “especially concerning” because it’s the region with the least access to vaccines, diagnostics and oxygen. That increases the continent’s mortality rate among critically ill patients, despite having fewer reported cases than other regions. New variants have substantially increased transmissions, “meaning the risks have increased for people not protected,” he said. “Right now the virus is moving faster than the global distribution of vaccines.” The emergence of more transmissible variants also means that public health and social measures may need to be more stringent and applied for longer in areas where vaccination rates remain low, he said. NYC launches $100 bonus for vaccine referrals New York City will launch a $100 referral bonus programme for community groups to boost the rate of vaccinations, which have slowed in recent weeks, Mayor Bill de Blasio said on Monday. For every unvaccinated person an organisation brings in to get a Covid-19 shot, the community group gets $100 per person, up to $20,000, De Blasio said. The program will start on Wednesday. De Blasio is trying to reach a goal of five million vaccinated by the end of June, which he warned earlier in June that the city might not hit. Only 3.9 million people are fully vaccinated, with 4.5 million receiving at least one dose. Vaccines show protection against variant Covid-19 vaccines from Pfizer and AstraZeneca are highly effective after two doses at preventing hospitalisation of those infected with the Delta variant, underscoring the urgency in getting people fully vaccinated. The Pfizer and BioNTech shot is 96% effective against hospitalisation after two doses, while the AstraZeneca and University of Oxford Covid inoculation is 92% effective, according to an analysis announced on Monday by Public Health England. Those results are comparable with the protection offered against the Alpha variant, which first emerged in Britain, the data show. Hospital workers lose vaccine mandate case Houston Methodist Hospital workers lost their bid to block a policy requiring them to be vaccinated against Covid-19 after a judge in the US District Court for the Southern District of Texas dismissed their lawsuit. The workers’ claim that the currently available Covid-19 vaccines are experimental and dangerous “is false, and it is also irrelevant”, Judge Lynn N Hughes said in a five-page court opinion. Moderna names Burton as chief medical officer Moderna named former Johnson & Johnson executive Paul Burton chief medical officer to replace Tal Zaks, who is leaving the Covid vaccine-maker after six years. Burton spent 16 years with J&J in a variety of roles, most recently as chief global medical affairs officer of Janssen Pharmaceuticals. He’ll assume the role at Moderna on 6 July, according to a statement. Germany’s Soeder rejects ‘vaccine tourism’ Bavaria Premier Markus Soeder has called for rules to be introduced to prevent people from travelling to other countries for a Covid-19 shot. “We don’t want vaccine tourism; that is wrong,” Soeder said on Monday at a news conference. He was addressing a report that a group of more than 100 workers from an Italian luxury resort travelled to Munich in May and were inoculated in a hotel at the Bavarian capital’s airport, then immediately returned to Italy. Novavax posts 90% vaccine efficacy Novavax said its Covid-19 vaccine was 90% effective at preventing symptomatic Covid and 100% effective at preventing moderate and severe symptoms. The shot was 93% effective against variants of concern, it said. The company expects to be able to manufacture 100 million doses a month by the end of the third quarter and 150 million daily by the end of the fourth quarter. Iran approves locally developed vaccine Iran issued an emergency licence for use of its locally developed COVIran Barakat vaccine, Health Minister Saeed Namaki told state TV on Monday, in a boost to the vaccination drive in the Middle East’s worst coronavirus outbreak. Officials previously said the jab is 100% effective against the Alpha variant first identified in the UK Approval for a second vaccine, jointly developed by Iranian and Cuban scientists, is expected “early next week,” the minister said. UK workers going to offices increase Employees entering offices in major UK cities rose to 35% of pre-Covid levels last week from 33% a week earlier, according to data from Metrikus, which installs sensors in office buildings to measure occupancy rates. US death toll nears 600,000 The US is approaching 600,000 deaths from Covid, even as new fatalities, infections and hospitalisations continue to plummet nationwide. The vaccination drive has slowed significantly, but the results are clear: Masks are disappearing, the country is largely reopening. Daily deaths have fallen from a peak of more than 5,000 a day in February to an average of about 300 over the last week. That slowed the growth of the US death toll, which hit half a million on 22 February, almost four months ago. Before then it took just over a month for the tally to rise from 400,000 to 500,000. The US has administered more than 309 million vaccines, with almost 87% of people 65 and older receiving at least one dose and 76% fully vaccinated. The ratio of death among the elderly compared with people aged 18-49 has dropped 66%, according to data from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Deaths among the vaccinated are exceedingly rare. A total of 603 people among the 139 million fully inoculated in the US died in the past six months. Ireland may lift UK quarantine requirements Ireland’s government is considering lifting quarantine requirements for fully vaccinated passengers arriving from Britain, though it may extend the minimum period of home isolation for others, the Irish Times reported. Travellers from Britain are presently requested to quarantine at a home address for 14 days on arrival, but can exit quarantine with a negative or “not detected” Covid-19 PCR test result after five days. That period may be extended to 10 days under changes likely to be discussed by the cabinet on Tuesday, the newspaper reported. Ho Chi Minh City extends social distancing Ho Chi Minh City extended social distancing measures for two more weeks from 15 June, newspaper Tuoi Tre reported, citing Mayor Nguyen Thanh Phong during a Monday meeting. Vietnam’s commercial hub is experiencing a number of new clusters even after two weeks of restrictions and more areas in the city may experience lockdowns, Phong said, according to Tuoi Tre. Extended social distancing applies to Go Vap district and a ward in district 12, which have been locked down since 31 May after a cluster tied to a religious group, the report said. The city, which imposed 15 days of social distancing on 31 May, has reported 209 more local Covid cases since 12 June, according to the health ministry. Johnson set to delay lifting UK’s Covid rules British Prime Minister Boris Johnson is preparing to delay his plan to lift England’s pandemic restrictions amid concerns that a rapid rise in Covid-19 cases could put hospitals under strain. The surge in the Delta variant first identified in India has forced Johnson and his team to rethink their blueprint for ending social distancing rules on 21 June. Instead, officials now expect the premier to announce a delay of as long as four weeks to the easing of most rules when he sets out his decision to the nation on Monday evening. Japan gains G7 backing for Olympics Japanese Prime Minister Yoshihide Suga gained the support of US President Joe Biden and other Group of Seven  (G7) leaders for Tokyo’s hosting of the Olympics next month, in a boost for the premier’s plans to push ahead with the event despite virus concerns. “President Biden affirmed his support for the Tokyo Olympic Games moving forward with all public health measures necessary to protect athletes, staff and spectators,” the White House said in a statement following a conversation between the two leaders on the sidelines of the G-7 summit in the coastal Cornwall region of the UK. The final communique from the G-7 leaders also mentioned their support for the holding of the Olympic and Paralympic Games Tokyo in a safe and secure manner “as a symbol of global unity in overcoming Covid-19”. Malaysia ‘may review lockdown’ Malaysia is studying the possibility of easing the standard operating procedures of its nationwide lockdown if daily Covid-19 infections drop below 4,000, The Star reported, citing Defence Minister Ismail Sabri Yaakob. The government will hold a meeting to discuss the matter, he said. However, any relaxation of movement restrictions will be subject to advice from the health ministry. California vaccinations near 40 million California’s vaccinations are approaching 40 million ahead of the state’s reopening on Tuesday. “Everyday life will feel a lot like before Covid-19,” the Department of Developmental Service said in a tweet. “Restaurants, shopping malls, movie theatres, and most everyday places will be open as normal with no capacity limits or social distancing required.” A total of 39.5 million shots have been administered, the equivalent of the state’s population. A total of 18.7 million people are now fully vaccinated, health authorities said. The state reported just four deaths on Sunday, bringing the total to 62,512. Germany could end outdoor masking German Health Minister Jens Spahn suggested ending the mask mandate for outdoor activities as Covid-19 infections recede. “With falling incidence rates, we should proceed in stages,” Funke Media Group quoted Spahn as saying in an interview. “As a first step, compulsory masks can be dropped outside.” Face masks will remain recommended “when in doubt”, for instance when travelling or meeting indoors, he said. Daily deaths in Germany attributed to Covid-19 declined to 18, the Robert Koch Institute health agency said on its website Sunday, the fewest since October. DM — With assistance by Reinie Booysen and Janice Kew. "Information pertaining to Covid-19, vaccines, how to control the spread of the virus and potential treatments is ever-changing. Under the South African Disaster Management Act Regulation 11(5)(c) it is prohibited to publish information through any medium with the intention to deceive people on government measures to address COVID-19. We are therefore disabling the comment section on this article in order to protect both the commenting member and ourselves from potential liability. Should you have additional information that you think we should know, please email letters@dailymaverick.co.za"