Whisky-infused navel orange marmalade. (Photo: Tony Jackman) Ingredients 1.5 kg navel oranges 1.5 kg granulated sugar Juice of 2 lemons 3 litres cold water Muslin String 5 Tbsp whisky Method Have a jug and a bowl to hand, the jug for the juice, the bowl for the pith and membranes. Weigh the oranges. Cut each in half and squeeze the juice out into the jug. Use a spoon to gouge out as much of the pith as possible from each orange half. Put this in the bowl with all the leftover membranes. Slice the orange rind thinly into strips. Squeeze the juice of two lemons into the orange juice. Lay out the muslin and put the contents of the bowl at the centre. Gather it up into a “bag” and tie the top end very tightly with string. I’d double it up as you do NOT want the bag breaking when boiling. You now have three elements: A container of orange (and lemon) juice, a pile of orange rind strips, and a muslin bag with its contents from inside the oranges. Put the muslin bag and the peels into a huge pot and fill with 3 litres cold water. (NB: Do not add sugar at this stage.) Add the juice. Turn on the heat and bring to a boil. Lower to a very gentle bubble and simmer for two hours. Leave to cool until you can handle the muslin bag without scalding your hands. Squeeze out as much liquid, including the oozy whitish pectin, as possible from the bag into the same pot. Discard the bag. Add the sugar, bring to a boil while stirring to dissolve the sugar, and boil briskly (on a very high heat) until it reaches setting point, which is 105℃. Or: If, like me, you don’t have a sugar thermometer, put a small plate in the freezer. Have a teaspoon to hand. After the first 15 minutes or so of boiling, get the plate out, put a teaspoonful of marmalade on it, and put it back in the freezer for two minutes. Take it out and tilt the plate to one side. If it flows, it’s not set. If it does not flow, turn off the heat immediately. If NOT set, rinse and dry the plate and return it to the freezer. Test every five minutes, until it’s set. After you’ve made marmalade a few times, you’ll be able to gauge fairly well with your eye when it looks as if it is at setting point. Once you’re satisfied that it’s set, turn off the heat immediately and stir in the whisky. After 10 minutes, spoon off any scum that’s risen to the top of the pot. Spoon the marmalade into hot, sterilised jars, up to the brim. Seal with sterilised lids. DM/TGIFood To enquire about Tony Jackman’s book, foodSTUFF (Human & Rousseau) please email him at tony@dailymaverick.co.za SUBSCRIBE: Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet