By Andra Timu and Irina Vilcu
May 22, 2021, 6:00 AM – Updated on May 22, 2021, 6:00 AM
Word Count: 641 Some parts of the region are hitting a wall at a relatively early stage in their campaigns amid safety fears over AstraZeneca’s shot, longstanding distrust of the authorities, fake news stories, and a lack of education on the benefits of the injection and the dangers of the virus itself. But with bigger western nations among the EU’s top sceptics, the developments call into question whether vaccination can deliver the herd immunity that the continent wants.  Romania provides a stark example. With just a fifth of its 19 million people having received a shot, waiting lists have disappeared and walk-in services are open to all. Government ministers will show up at vaccination centers in person on Saturday in a bid to lure the less enthusiastic. “We’re trying to find the best communication channels to reach citizens,” Deputy Health Minister Andrei Baciu said in an interview. “We use public figures, politicians and sports icons, but we also use regular people. In the end, they’re the best examples — people trust other people.” Romania’s not alone in struggling. Bulgaria, which has given a first dose to just 16% of its population, has also resorted to walk-ins. Hungary’s vaccination chief said this week that there now are “a lot more” shots than takers, though its campaign is second only to Malta within the EU. On the EU’s fringe, Serbia — which like Hungary has outperformed by offering Russian and Chinese-made injections — is offering about $30 to people who get an injection.  Hesitancy isn’t limited to the EU: American states and cities have begun offering incentives including free pizza to people who get their shots, though U.S. inoculation levels are already among the world’s best. And, for now, there’s no panic in the bloc’s west. France met a target to vaccinate at least 20 million people — about 30% of its population — by mid-May and is giving a record number of daily injections. A May 20 poll showed two-thirds of the country wanting to get a shot or already having done so, while negative attitudes toward inoculation plunged. But Daphne Ahrendt — a senior research manager at Eurofound, which tracks Europe’s vaccine skepticism — says false narratives continue to curb demand across the EU by stoking safety concerns. “It’s crucial for governments to make accurate information available on all communication channels,” she said by phone. “This isn’t just happening in eastern Europe, but to a certain degree it’s happening everywhere.” Read more: For EU’s East, Vaccine Persuasion Proves Toughest in Romania Conveying the message is proving tough for Romania. The share of the population wanting to get a shot barely budged between October and March, according to Slovakia-based think tank Globsec. With a goal to vaccinate 5 million people by June set to be missed, the ultimate target of inoculating 60% to 70% of the country is in jeopardy. As well as this weekend’s appearances by ministers, the government is sending doctors and nurses door-to-door, particularly in rural areas, to make inoculation more accessible. There’ll also be vaccination “marathons” — including one at an airport to remind Romanians of the travel benefits of the shot. Poland, too, fears falling short. While half of its citizens have had or are registered for a shot, it’s also pulled in celebrities to promote inoculation. “The challenge now is going to be how to win new people, how to convince them of the need for vaccination,” Michal Dworczyk, who oversees Poland’s rollout, told reporters Thursday. “We can’t rule out a scenario where herd immunity isn’t reached.” –With assistance from Zoe Schneeweiss, Nikos Chrysoloras, Zoltan Simon, Geraldine Amiel, Dorota Bartyzel and Slav Okov. To contact the authors of this story:
Andra Timu in Bucharest at atimu@bloomberg.net
Irina Vilcu in Bucharest at isavu@bloomberg.net