Novak Djokovic of Serbia in action against David Goffin of Belgium during their Wimbledon quarterfinal match in London on 10 July 2019. (Photo: EPA-EFE / Nic Bothma) Novak Djokovic took one step closer to becoming the first man in more than half a century to complete a calendar-year Grand Slam with a first-round victory at Wimbledon on Monday. Since Rod Laver in 1969, several male players have come close, with three titles, to winning the four major championships in one year, including Djokovic himself on two occasions (2011 and 2015). But not since Laver did it for the second time 52 years ago has any male player claimed the full set in a calendar year. After winning 14 matches at the Australian Open and French Open to claim the first two majors of 2021, Djokovic chalked off Grand Slam win number 15 over Britain’s Jack Draper on the opening day of the season’s third major at Wimbledon. Fifteen victories down, 13 to go, to become the first player, male or female, since Steffi Graf in 1988 to win tennis’s four major tournaments in the same year. It’s still a long way off, but as a five-time Wimbledon winner, Djokovic will take some stopping at the All England Club in the coming 12 days. He also intends to play at the Olympics in Tokyo next month. If he wins Wimbledon for a sixth time before Tokyo, he would remain on track to win not only the Grand Slam, but the “Golden Slam”, which Graf also achieved in 1988 when she took the Olympic gold in Seoul. “I’m trying to peak at the majors; I’ve been managing to do that throughout my career,” Djokovic said before Wimbledon started. “I’ve had the fortune to really play my best tennis when it mattered the most. “Once I’m on the court, I try to lock in and I try to exclude all the distractions. I feel like over the years I managed to develop the mechanism that allows me to do that.” The Serb won the past two Wimbledon tournaments in 2018 and 2019 and has a career record of 95 wins and 18 defeats on grass for an 84.1% winning ratio. Only eight-time Wimbledon champion Roger Federer has a better winning percentage on grass. And despite dropping the first set in his first-round match against Draper, Djokovic still fired off 25 aces — his best return at Wimbledon. It was another ominous sign for his future opponents. Djokovic is not perfect, but he’s close to it. “I think I probably had one of the best serving performances that I can recall on any surface,” Djokovic said after his win over Draper. “I could not be more pleased with the rhythm of my serve. On grass, the quickest surface in our sport, it helps a lot getting a lot of free points on that first serve. “It was a very good performance. I’m pleased with the second, third and fourth sets, the way I played from the back of the court. I started returning better as well midway [through the] second set. All in all, I’m satisfied.” Djokovic is not only closing in on a Grand Slam, but he is also one step closer to his 20th Grand Slam title, which would draw him level with Federer and Nadal in career majors. What sets him apart is that he is the only member of the big three to have won each of the four Grand Slams at least twice. He achieved that feat with success at the French Open at Roland Garros this month, which was his second title in Paris. He also has nine Australian Opens and three US Open titles on his CV. Djokovic faces South Africa’s Kevin Anderson in the second round in a repeat of the 2018 final where the Serb won in a comfortable three sets. But Djokovic is not only focused on making history on the court, he is still heavily involved in a breakaway players’ union, which continues to upset the tennis establishment. He and Canadian professional Vasek Pospisil have been instrumental in setting up the Professional Tennis Players Association (PTPA), which they launched at the US Open in New York last September. After being a senior figure on the ATP Player Council, which is part of the ATP Tour, Djokovic has lost patience with the establishment. At a PTPA media conference on the eve of Wimbledon, he explained his motivation. “We have tried the so-to-say conventional way and we are now trying the unconventional way to make a significant long-term difference for the players,” Djokovic said. “Obviously nothing is guaranteed. We are a new, young, learning organisation. We would love to have as many players and people who are a part of this sport support us. We need your help. We need everyone to recognise the core value, the very reason PTPA was founded and why it exists.” Djokovic says he is fighting for other players. He has made almost $150-million in prize money and twice as much more in endorsement contracts. But his goal with the trade union is to give lesser players a stronger voice in the game. “It’s really difficult for a player whose priority is to hit the tennis ball, recover, have all his needs met in order for him to perform at his best,” Djokovic said. “Then, if he has time and energy, to deal with the politics and business side of things in tennis. It’s very difficult for us to take this step forward and be responsible and really fully active and involved in the business side of things. But I’m glad I’m able, from the ranking position that I have in the tennis world, that my voice is being heard.” Osaka, Nadal and Halep miss Wimbledon While Djokovic is the compelling story at the tournament, the big news before Wimbledon started was the withdrawal of defending champion Simona Halep and Naomi Osaka in the women’s draw. Halep tore a calf muscle in May and was forced to miss the French Open. She simply didn’t have enough time to recover in time to defend the Wimbledon title she won so brilliantly in the final against Serena Williams in 2019. “It is with great sadness that I’m announcing my withdrawal from the championships as my calf injury has not fully recovered,” Halep told the tournament’s official website. “I gave it everything I had in order to be ready to play Wimbledon and, after having such special memories from two years ago, I was excited and honoured to step back on these beautiful courts as defending champion. “I can honestly say that I’m really down and upset about having to take this decision. This period has been difficult, but to miss the last two majors has made it even more challenging mentally and physically. We will see what the future holds, but I’m hoping it will make me a stronger person and athlete.” Osaka withdrew because she wasn’t mentally ready to play following a furore over media engagement duties at the French Open. “Naomi won’t be playing Wimbledon this year,” Osaka’s agent, Stuart Duguid, said in an email to AFP. “She is taking some personal time with friends and family. “She will be ready for the Olympics and is excited to play in front of her home fans.” Nadal withdrew from Wimbledon and the Tokyo Olympics to rest after a gruelling clay court season took its toll on his ageing body. “It’s never an easy decision to take, but after listening to my body and discussing it with my team I understand that it is the right decision,” Nadal said in a statement. “The goal is to prolong my career and continue to do what makes me happy, that is to compete at the highest level and keep fighting for those professional and personal goals at the maximum level of competition. “The fact that there has only been two weeks between Roland Garros and Wimbledon didn’t make it easier on my body to recuperate after the always demanding clay court season. They have been two months of great effort and the decision I take is focused on looking at the mid and long term.” DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet