Bees at work. (Photo: Supplied)  The author supports The Seed Fund which provides two balanced meals a day for children living in Malacca Informal Settlement in Durban North. To help contact The Seed Fund. Travellers on the N3 will recall the small, squat building with a bright red roof and emblazoned with “Peel’s Honey Shop”, off the country’s busiest road at Merrivale. In the late Eighties the shop was a larney reincarnation of the original farm stall that one encountered on road trips, and it certainly showed growth for a business that had started out with the original owner, John Peel, selling honey from his car boot on the roadside. Bordering the KZN Midlands, Peel’s (www.peels.co.za) was a landmark long before the Midlands Meander tourism route emerged, although the shop recently relocated and was reincarnated in a container at the Howick (South) Underberg exit. It remains equally accessible from the highway but showcases the updated brand which is, all at once, more modern but even more old-fashioned in its purist approach to honey. Spearheading this is Dyllan Roach, the new “general manager/MD” who waves dismissively at defining his title. What he is is results driven. And he has opinions … lots of them. The term “liquid gold” keeps popping into my head but after Dyllan laments the existence of runny honey, I decide to steer firmly away from this description. This honey in squeezy bottles (which are fully recyclable) is their biggest seller and also the one product he wishes didn’t exist. Sure, it’s scales of economics, but he despairs that the heating process required to get it to this consumer-friendly state destroys natural goodness. What exactly does it destroy? “Everything!” he exclaims adamantly. “The heating kills good enzymes with the bad ones. Do you know, this honey and syrup have the same nutritional content?” Covid and lockdown brought many changes and, along with it, a blast of fresh air for Peel’s. Founded in 1924, South Africa’s oldest honey brand wasn’t enjoying the growth it should, so a decision was taken to recruit an entrepreneur to head up operations. Enter Dyllan. He and his brother started Johannesburg-based The Tap Room – which ultimately became South Africa’s largest craft beer distributor – doubling turnover year-on-year for a decade. Just before lockdown they sold to a Cape Town brewery and, while he was contemplating his next move, Dyllan was offered the position at Peel’s. “I had to fix everything that was wrong. Production was slow, systems needed to be modernised and we needed a new website and e-commerce,” he said. He likes a challenge and, aside from already achieving growth targets, he is hellbent on educating consumers. This includes promoting products that showcase honey in its most natural state like their raw and creamed honeys and honeycomb. “Someone phoned and said they have bee legs in their honey…. Well, it’s a natural product,” he says unapologetically. On a more serious note, Covid-19 has seen a surge in the health market and a marked increase nationally in Peel’s raw honey sales. A source of equal amounts of frustration and opportunity is consumers’ lack of knowledge. Dyllan says the biggest misconceptions are that liquid honey has the same health benefits as raw honey, and that most honey on our shelves is South African. There is actually a global shortage of honey that complies with raw and Fairtrade standards. “The biggest complaint from our consumers is that they are paying R120 for honey on the shelf. People see a bottle of honey for R60 in a supermarket, but it’s impossible to put a bottle of honey on the shelves at that price. It’s just not pure,” Dyllan explains. “South Africa doesn’t produce enough honey to make up what we consume – 70% is imported.” Most of this comes from China but the issue is that any imported honey – even, for the time being, from a close neighbour like Zambia – has to be irradiated. This entails exposing the honey to radiant energy (such as gamma rays) to kill any bacteria and pathogens which also destroys any goodness. Legally labels are required to state if the honey has been irradiated and the country of origin and, even if South Africa is one of these the countries of origin, the ratio of local to imported honey can be as little as 1:10. In 2018 M-Net’s Carte Blanche did an exposé on local honey which revealed that one of Peel’s suppliers had been deceiving them. “In KZN, bottlers were called out for adulteration but in the Cape, it was deception,” says Dyllan. Honey should only contain nectar gathered and stored in honeycomb by bees and adulteration is when anything additional like glucose, dextrose and sugar syrup is added. He feels that retailers are more often duped rather than complicit as duplicitous bottlers deceive them by removing all pollen traces from imported honey, so lab tests are unable to detect foreign plants and trees. Given that selling South African-only honey is the basis of their brand, Dyllan decided to take a firmer stand. All suppliers now sign warranties and he is adamant that if someone is caught out the company will lay charges of fraud. Peel’s has also implemented a new system for complete traceability. “We can now pick up any product and the batch number will give the name of the person who bottled it, the person who packed it, the beekeeper it came from and the profile of plants around the hive,” he explains. The three biggest beekeepers in the country (who each run about 12,000 hives) supply Peel’s exclusively, plus they have other smaller beekeepers who enjoy the apiary aspect but not the sticky, tricky business of bottling and selling it themselves. Peel’s also sources honey from Sizana, a co-operative community project they run in conjunction with SAPPI. Members of local communities are trained in environmentally-friendly and ethical beekeeping practices and are provided with hives and equipment. There are now around 1,000 successful micro beekeepers. Before Peel’s products are allowed to hit the sweet spot, very strict testing is undertaken. Honey is delivered to their holding facility and remains unprocessed until three different tests are done. The local labs check for bacteria and do a pollen assessment that shows which trees and flowers are prevalent around the hive. If any foreign trees are picked up in this analysis, the honey is automatically rejected. Samples are also sent to Germany to test for adulteration. Taste, colour, constitution and moisture levels are taken into account – honey with a high moisture content is not accepted as it means it’s been harvested too early and too much moisture can cause fermentation. Once testing is completed, their large product range is hand processed in a small factory in Hilton in the KZN Midlands. The hero products are raw (unclarified and not heated beyond hive temperature) and creamed honey (raw honey that has crystallised and is then whipped to aerate it and stop it from crystallising further), oozing honey and comb plus small batch and single nectar honey. The single nectar honey, available in liquid and raw versions, comes from one of 12 different plants and translates directly onto the palate with flavours like orange blossom, fynbos, macadamia and saligna. The small batch collection is a hit with aficionados and these limited-edition honeys can come in anything from blackberry, avocado and litchi. Liquid multiflora honey is Peel’s entry level product but this still has to be blended from different batches (using sunflower as a base because most beekeepers are on sunflower plantations) to create a consistent taste profile. The brand also offers confectionary products – think delicious honey and nut brittles, honeycomb and ice cream toppings – and nuts. The latter are sold on their own or as all-natural nut butters and, honestly, what can be more gratifying than peanut butter and honey? Peel’s even does a pre-mix of this time-honoured combination using a raw honey. All of this is available online where purists can even buy an entire frame of honeycomb to “harvest” their own. The site also offers beeswax, candles and Michelin-starred chef Jan Hendrick van der Westhuizen’s book, JAN the Journal Volume 6, which includes a honey guide and recipes using Peel’s products. But for the real deal, head to their “flagship” store, a fire engine red converted container on a stretch of grass, in the shadow of the N3. The well-stocked store also has a coffee shop, honey on tap and the opportunity to sample goods, but greater things await. It underpins Peel’s commitment to education and they are waiting for municipality permission (hopefully in the next few months) to open a consumer experience and education centre that will include having hives on site and full product tastings. There has been a post-Covid surge in beekeeping as a hobby so they’ll also offer beekeeping courses and sell the necessary equipment. It is quite astounding that honey is the third most faked product in the world. Never again should you simply pick a bottle off the shelf without scrutinising the label to ensure it really is ethically produced, local honey. And, if you do, one would hope that at least your tastebuds will prevail and you’ll make the right decision by default. DM/TGIFood Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 3 So one should avoid any honey in a squeeze bottle? How does one distinguish between raw honey and runny honey? I read it as we should rather eat the other honey which isnt heated (which is so much more delicious anyway) – otherwise most of the good parts of eating honey get lost? Beautiful pictures! I love this honey – especially the white aloe they have on their website and the creamed. The barrister at our local coffee place in Jozi also recommended I use honey instead of sugar in my coffee – what an awesome difference the honey makes…delicious! Yum