Potatoes baked in the oven, with a twist of rosemary and blue cheese. (Photo: Tony Jackman)  Ingredients 4 potatoes 3 Tbsp crumbled blue cheese 3 Tbsp butter 2 Tbsp cream 2 Tbsp rosemary needles, chopped very finely Rosemary salt to taste (or use plain salt and ½ tsp finely chopped rosemary) Black pepper to taste Method Mix the crumbled blue cheese, butter, cream and finely chopped rosemary in a microwaveable bowl and microwave on high for a minute until the butter has melted. Stir, then pop the bowl into the freezer so that the butter makes the mixture thick and manageable. Wash, dry and halve the potatoes, and use a teaspoon to scoop out a little hole in the centre of each half, using your eye to try to line up the two halves. (Keep the little bits you’ve removed: see below.) Cut 4 large pieces of heavy foil and grease one side of each with butter. When the filling has thickened in the freezer, spoon it into each half, season the cut side of the potato halves with rosemary salt and pepper, and sandwich together. You have to work very quickly and wrap them up in foil the second you’ve put the halves together. (The potatoes go on the buttered side of the foil, obviously.) Bake in a 240℃ oven for 90 minutes to two hours or until tender. Gently fry the little bits you scooped out, in butter, seasoned with a little rosemary salt, to serve alongside. DM/TGIFood To enquire about Tony Jackman’s book, foodSTUFF (Human & Rousseau) please email him at tony@dailymaverick.co.za SUBSCRIBE: Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet