A woman receiving her vaccine at Karl Bremer Hospital on 8 June, 2021 in Cape Town, South Africa. The health department launched the second phase of the vaccination rollout in efforts to vaccinate citizens over the age of 60. (Photo by Gallo Images/Misha Jordaan) On Tuesday 15 June, the latest vaccination statistics available were for midnight Sunday 13 June. Registration stood at 3,504,878 and 1,297,520 people had received their first Pfizer Covid-19 vaccine dose. The provincial breakdown is as follows: On the evening of Monday 14 June, the CEO of Aspen Stephen Saad told eNCA that Johnson & Johnson will replace the two million doses South Africa can’t use within the next two weeks. A batch of 300,000 doses will arrive within the next two days to vaccinate the country’s teachers, he said. In the week of 21 June, Aspen will release one million doses. It will release more doses in July. Read more here. Meanwhile, health experts have weighed in on vaccination rates, registration hiccups and the impact of the Johnson & Johnson delay. They all agree: things are moving too slowly. Read the report by Elri Voigt. The Gauteng department of health has confirmed that all public vaccination sites accept walk-ins. It will not turn away those who have not registered — they will be registered and vaccinated at the site. How to register Register to be vaccinated during Phase 2 on the Electronic Vaccination Data System. Alternatively, register on WhatsApp by sending “REGISTER” to 060 012 3456. Or, register by SMS by dialling *134*832*your ID number#. If you don’t have an ID number, just dial *134*832#. You do not need a smartphone, airtime or data to register by SMS. If you encounter any issues, call the Covid-19 hotline on 0800 029 999. DM/MC. "Information pertaining to Covid-19, vaccines, how to control the spread of the virus and potential treatments is ever-changing. Under the South African Disaster Management Act Regulation 11(5)(c) it is prohibited to publish information through any medium with the intention to deceive people on government measures to address COVID-19. We are therefore disabling the comment section on this article in order to protect both the commenting member and ourselves from potential liability. Should you have additional information that you think we should know, please email letters@dailymaverick.co.za"