Image: Penguin Random House / Composite: The Reading List This recipe is from Cariema Isaacs’ new cookbook Curried, a joyful homage to one of the world’s most beloved and versatile dishes. The book is inspired by the author’s memories of the slow-cooked Cape Malay curries of her childhood, as well as the fast-paced landscape of the Middle East, where she now lives. *** Goan Beef Vindaloo One of the reasons I am so fond of this curry is because it reminds me of a beef dish my father used to make. It was made with blade beef, which was prepared the night before, lightly salted but generously seasoned with freshly ground black pepper and slow cooked, not a single minute rushed. But no matter how hard I try, I just cannot seem to recreate it! So I’m drawing on his adoration and love of beef with this recipe instead. Like many Goan dishes, this one originated in Portugal and was adapted later to accommodate the local Indian palate. The traditional Portuguese ‘vinha d’alhos’ was made with pork braised in garlic and wine. Later, Goans substituted the pork and wine with beef (or lamb), vinegar and lots of chilli and aromatics to create vindaloo as we know it today. I feel compelled to mention here that when I sit down to eat with Ryan Fernandes, one of my buddies from Goa, he doesn’t even break a sweat when he eats anything spicy. This recipe contains two of the ingredients Goans adore: meat and heat! TIP: Vindaloo is known to be one of the hottest curries in the world and much as I thrive on hot and spicy curries, even I had to adjust the heat from the original recipe! This curry is also one of those curries that calls for good quality spices and ingredients, so take the time to toast the whole spices and then grind them into a fine powder. In this instance, a store-bought paste and pre-packed spice blend will certainly not guarantee the same robust and authentic flavour! Serves 4–6 For the spice blend For the marinade For the curry Preparing the spice blend Preparing the marinade and meat Preparing the curry Cariema Isaacs’s Curried’s is published by Penguin Random House (R350). Visit The Reading List for South African book news – including recipes! – daily. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet