Sekunjalo Group executive chairman Iqbal Survé. (Photo: Gallo Images / Wessel Oosthuizen) The cat is out of the bag about the identity of what controversial IT group Ayo Technology Solutions described only as the departure of a “large client” when it announced its interim results to February in May. It appears the client was BT, with which it has a significant joint shareholding in the British company’s local subsidiary, BTSA. The reason for the split was that BT felt there was a “misrepresentation of facts to the Standing Committee on Finance made by representatives of the Sekunjalo Group”, in a presentation to the committee. BT said it would be exploring alternative options to meet its BEE obligations. The announcement of the identity of the company intensifies the problems faced by Ayo since BT has had a long relationship with the Sekunjalo Group and has historically generated significant income for the company that is indirectly controlled by businessman Iqbal Survé. It will also place a question mark over the decision of the company to increase its interim dividend by 86% to 65c per share, despite revenue falling 36% during the period, and the company recording a pre-tax loss of R66-million. The gross quantum of the dividend will be around R223.6-million, about half of which will accrue to Ayo’s parent company, African Equity Empowerment Investments (AEEI), which is also indirectly controlled by Survé. After paying the dividend, Ayo will have a projected cash balance of R2.4-billion, about half of the R4.3-billion the Public Investment Corporation (PIC) paid for 29% of the company in a disputed initial public offering in 2017. The current market value of Ayo is just under R2-billion, amazingly less than the cash on the balance sheet. The PIC has instituted proceedings, which are hotly disputed by Ayo, to recover the R4.3-billion it invested. The case has been pending for more than a year. The decision to increase the dividend despite the company’s loss-making situation will increase suspicions that the company is ejecting its cash in case the legal proceedings go against it. The company has implicitly refuted this assumption. Independent Media, a company partially owned by Survé’s investment holding company Sekunjalo, quoted Ayo CEO Howard Plaatjes last Wednesday as saying “strong potential” for the company was expected in the second half of the year. “Cash-flow challenges will test our companies and our businesses, but we have plans in place to diminish any circumstances arising out of this,” Plaatjes was quoted as saying. BT has not been specific about what particularly it objected to in the company’s statement to the parliamentary standing committee. A spokeswoman told TechCentral, which first published the story, that: “There were factually inaccurate statements made by the Sekunjalo Group in front of the Standing Committee on Finance. We were not aware, nor in agreement with, the assumptions made in the pre-listing statement conditions of Ayo Technology Solutions that referred to BT South Africa. This has left us with no other option but to correct the record and terminate the relationship with Sekunjalo.” AYO Technology bought a 30% stake in British Telecoms South Africa (BTSA) from its parent company, for a subscription price of R990-million, shortly after the listing. DM/BM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet