An official said Houthi forces trying to seize gas-rich Marib fired a missile and a drone. An army spokesperson later told Al Hadath TV channel that two missiles hit a residential area and a market, and that two drones were launched. Two medical sources told Reuters the hospital had received five people killed in the blasts and more than 15 injured. Another military spokesperson told Al Hadath that at least 8 people were killed and tens wounded. There was no confirmation from the Iran-aligned Houthi movement, which has launched an offensive to take the internationally recognised government’s last stronghold in the north of the Arabian Peninsula country. “The missiles fell on a residential neighbourhood and on a commercial market. There is no military activity there at all,” army spokesperson Yahya al-Hatmi told Saudi-owned Al Hadath. He said one drone was shot down and the other exploded in midair. “These are the strongest explosions we have heard in Marib in four years” resident Abdulsalam Ghaleb told Reuters. Earlier this month at least 17 people were killed in an explosion near a petrol station in Marib. The government said it was caused by a Houthi missile, but the group said it had only hit a military camp. Yemen has been mired in violence since the Houthis ousted the Saudi-backed government from the capital, Sanaa, in late 2014, prompting a military coalition led by Saudi Arabia to intervene months later. The United Nations, backed by the United States, is pressing for a nationwide ceasefire and have called on the Iran-aligned Houthi movement to cease its offensive in Marib, which hosts around 1 million internally displaced people. The conflict, widely seen in the region as a proxy war between Saudi Arabia and Iran, has caused what the United Nations says is the world’s largest humanitarian crisis. (Reporting by Mohammed Ghobari in Aden and Alaa Swilam and Ahmed Toba in Cairo; Writing by Ghaida Ghantous; Editing by Mark Heinrich and Grant McCool) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet