Laurel Hubbard of New Zealand competes in the women's +90kg final at the 2018 Commonwealth Games on Australia's Gold Coast. (Photo by Dan Mullan/Getty Images) Hubbard will compete in the super-heavyweight 87kg category, her selection made possible by updated qualifying requirements. The 43-year-old, who will be the oldest lifter at the Games, had competed in men’s weightlifting competitions before transitioning in 2013. “I am grateful and humbled by the kindness and support that has been given to me by so many New Zealanders,” Hubbard said in a statement issued by the New Zealand Olympic Committee (NZOC) on Monday. Hubbard has been eligible to compete at the Olympics since 2015, when the International Olympic Committee (IOC) issued guidelines allowing any transgender athlete to compete as a woman provided their testosterone levels are below 10 nanomoles per litre for at least 12 months before their first competition. Some scientists have said the guidelines do little to mitigate the biological advantages of those who have gone through puberty as males, including bone and muscle density. Advocates for transgender inclusion argue the process of transition decreases that advantage considerably and that physical differences between athletes mean there is never a truly level playing field. NZOC CEO Kereyn Smith said Hubbard met IOC and International Weightlifting Federation selection criteria. “We acknowledge that gender identity in sport is a highly sensitive and complex issue requiring a balance between human rights and fairness on the field of play,” Smith said. “As the New Zealand Team, we have a strong culture of… inclusion and respect for all.” The New Zealand government offered its support. “Laurel is a member of New Zealand’s Olympic team. We are proud of her as we are of all our athletes, and will be supporting her all the way,” sport minister Grant Robertson said. Centre of debate Weightlifting has been at the centre of the debate over the fairness of transgender athletes competing against women, and Hubbard’s presence in Tokyo could prove divisive. Save Women’s Sport Australasia, an advocacy group for women athletes, criticised Hubbard’s selection. “It is a flawed policy from the IOC that has allowed the selection of a 43-year-old biological male who identifies as a woman to compete in the female category,” the group said. Hubbard’s gold medal wins at the 2019 Pacific Games in Samoa, where she topped the podium ahead of Samoa’s Commonwealth Games champion Feagaiga Stowers, triggered outrage in the host nation. Samoa’s weightlifting boss said Hubbard’s selection for Tokyo would be like letting athletes “dope” and feared it could cost the small Pacific nation a medal. Belgian weightlifter Anna Vanbellinghen said last month that allowing Hubbard to compete in Tokyo was unfair for women and “like a bad joke”. Australia’s weightlifting federation sought to block Hubbard from competing at the 2018 Commonwealth Games on the Gold Coast but organisers rejected the move. Hubbard was forced to withdraw after injuring herself during competition, and thought her career was over. “When I broke my arm at the Commonwealth Games three years ago, I was advised that my sporting career had likely reached its end,” said Hubbard on Monday, thanking New Zealanders. “But your support, your encouragement, and your aroha (love) carried me through the darkness.” Olympic Weightlifting New Zealand President Richie Patterson said Hubbard had “grit and perseverance” to return from injury and rebuild her confidence. “We look forward to supporting her in her final preparations towards Tokyo,” he said. Another transgender athlete, BMX rider Chelsea Wolfe, will travel to Tokyo as part of the US team, but is named as an alternate and not assured of competing. Canadian women’s soccer player Quinn, who came out as transgender last year and uses only one name, might be selected for the Olympics, too, after winning bronze with the women’s team at the 2016 Rio Games. Reuters/DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 7 I don’t see this ending well, one way or another. So right!! The world has gone PC mad. clever tactics… no other ‘women’ in the +90kg category! I don’t understand how Hubbard is allowed to compete, yet Caster Semenya gets banned in athletics. How is this possible? You can be a male weightlifter and transgender (if that’s a verb) to a woman and the IOC is ok that. If you’re Caster Semenya however, being a biological woman problematic. Do I smell hypocrisy? Clearly its time for a third category of competitors at sports meetings. Why is that so hard to digest and implement?