Glazed navel orange fridge tart. (Photo: Tony Jackman)  This recipe accompanies this column Ingredients 1 packet lemon-flavoured Tennis biscuits 125 g butter (quarter of a 500 g brick), melted 1.5 cans sweetened condensed milk 6 Tbsp freshly squeezed orange juice Zest of 2 oranges 180 ml fresh cream 2 tsp gelatine powder melted by pouring it on top of 3 Tbsp of very hot (not boiled) water, and stirred until there are no grains left For the glaze: ⅔ cup/ 80 ml orange juice 90 g castor sugar 4 to 6 very thin orange slices Method Crumble the Tennis biscuits in a bowl as finely as possible. Stir in the grated zest of one (note: one) orange. Melt the butter and stir it in. Grease a deep 24 cm (more or less) tart dish (there is a lot of filling so you need depth to hold it) and press the biscuits in to cover the bottom and up the sides. This needs a bit of care and patience. Refrigerate the base for 30 minutes or more. Whip the cream until it’s thick; soft peak stage. In a bowl, mix together the condensed milk, grated zest of the other orange, orange juice, and whisk well. Fold in the whipped cream. Prepare and cool the gelatine mixture, then very quickly whisk it in while pouring it in in a thin stream. Pour the mixture into the refrigerated base and return to the fridge to set for a few hours. While it is setting, make the glaze: combine all the ingredients in a pot and bring to a boil, stirring, until the sugar has dissolved. Cook gently for about 5 minutes until the syrup turns fairly thick and sticky. It needs to be like hot jam. Remove the orange slices to a side plate. When the syrup has cooled but is not yet set, arrange the orange slices on top of the tart and drizzle the syrup over using a dessertspoon. Refrigerate until needed. DM/TGIFood To enquire about Tony Jackman’s book, foodSTUFF (Human & Rousseau) please email him at tony@dailymaverick.co.za SUBSCRIBE: Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet