Oxtail soup with red bell pepper, corn and chickpeas. (Photo: Tony Jackman)  Ingredients 500 g oxtail, cut into thin pieces (about 1.5 cm thick) 2 Tbsp olive oil 1 large onion, diced 2 large carrots, diced very small 2 or 3 leeks (depending on their size), sliced thinly 1 celery stick, diced 3 garlic cloves, chopped finely 1 x 400 g can chopped tomatoes 1 x 400 g can chickpeas, drained and rinsed 1 tsp dried chilli flakes 1 tsp paprika 3 bay leaves 1 litre water 300 ml chicken or beef stock 250 ml/ ½ cup semi-sweet or full cream sherry, depending on your sweet tooth 1 large red bell pepper, diced 1 mielie/ corn on the cob Salt and pepper to taste Chopped coriander leaves to garnish Method Sauté the onion, carrot, leeks, celery and garlic in a little olive oil until soft, simmer for 5 more minutes while stirring, then add the chopped tomatoes, drained chickpeas, chilli flakes, bay leaves and paprika, and heat through. Add the water and stock and the oxtail, bring to a boil and reduce to a very low simmer. Season with salt, and simmer with the lid on the pot for at least five hours. Check the liquid levels every now and then, and top up with more water if necessary. After four or five hours, or when the meat is nearing optimum tenderness but not quite there, heat the sherry and stir it in, and add the kernels of 1 mielie/ corn on the cob, and the diced red bell pepper. Check seasoning and add salt if needed, and ground black pepper to taste. Let it continue cooking on a low heat until the total duration is as long as six or seven hours, or until the meat is perfectly tender, but do watch in case the liquid cooks away too much. Don’t judge the duration in time; it’s done when the oxtail meat is fall-off-the-bones tender. Anyone who has cooked oxtail knows that seven hours is not an outlandish duration at all; it might well take as long as that. Garnish with chopped coriander leaves. DM/TGIFood To enquire about Tony Jackman’s book, foodSTUFF (Human & Rousseau) please email him at tony@dailymaverick.co.za SUBSCRIBE: Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet