GCP’s analysis also follows a report last week from the United Nations showing that countries’ latest goals submitted under the Paris agreement would lower emissions only half-a-percent by 2030. By then, the world needs to halve its emissions, according to a landmark 2018 report from the UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, in order to keep global temperature rise below 1.5° Celsius, a crucial tipping point. The world has already warmed about 1.2°C since the mid-19th century. Corinne Le Quéré, Royal Society Research Professor of climate science at the University of East Anglia and the GCP paper’s lead author, said that 2021 will be make-or-break. “This year is the most important year for tackling climate change because we’re coming out of this pandemic. Governments are making big investments,” she said, which will have a determinative influence on the course of climate change. The challenge the world faces now is to replicate that drop in emissions every year from now through 2050—while promoting economic growth, not quarantine and contraction—or else face increasingly dire environmental consequences. Emission levels won’t stay this low, the authors write, because “temporary measures have little impact on the fossil-fuel based infrastructure that sustains the world economy.” China—the world’s biggest polluter, which last year pledged to reach net-zero carbon emissions by 2060—belongs to the “upper-middle-income” group of economies, along with 98 others. Collectively, they emit 51% of global CO₂. This group saw their emissions rise 30% between 2005 and 2019, although that has tapered off considerably since 2016. Emissions data released last week by China’s National Bureau of Statistics showed a total rise in emissions of more than 1% for 2020. More than two-thirds of 36 “high-income” nations are seeing emissions fall. With more than 2,000 climate change-related laws or policies in place in different countries, government action “appears to have played a key role in curbing the growth in emissions” in the five years before the pandemic, Le Quéré and her co-authors wrote. Nations with declining emissions are largely getting there by winding down their coal plants and adding renewable power to their grids. What they’re not doing is adding additional fossil-fuel generation. “That’s not helpful,” Le Quéré said. Industry has seen some efficiency gains, which “happens all the time,” she said, “It’s the nature of this sector” to seek money- and resource-saving measures. Addressing transport- and buildings-related emissions are critical next steps for countries that want to achieve a steeper drop in their greenhouse pollution. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 4 While it is important to get away from burning fossil fuels over time, this kind of articles and headlines is nonsense. CO2 in the atmosphere is not a poison (at such low concentrations), but a key substance for plant growth and all life on earth. Agree with both your comments Bennett. This type of sensationalist nonsense is based on mythology not science. Without CO2 in the atmosphere, no photosynthesis would happen and all of us would be dead. Moreover, the atmospheric CO2-concentration used to be much higher (500ppm – 2500ppm) over the past 500 mio years, during the era when all higher organisms came to life. There is some truth in these statements ,but both writers are missing the bigger picture.With natural cycles of lower and higher admospheric temperatures in the past,it occured over thousands of years.( not a few decades). The organisms then ,also did not live in coastal cities!
Science is warning