Heredia, 49, faces a maximum sentence of five years in prison and a $250,000 fine. Justice Department lawyer Matthew Sullivan told the judge that Heredia, who became a naturalized citizen in 2016, could lose his immigration status and be removed from the U.S. But Sullivan also said Heredia had agreed to cooperate with the government as it investigates further. Glencore has said it is cooperating with authorities. Read More: Former Glencore Trader Charged With Oil Price Manipulation The investigation that led to Heredia’s plea is the latest legal setback for Glencore, already embroiled in a wide-ranging probe by the U.S. Department of Justice on allegations of bribery and money laundering. The U.K., Switzerland and Brazil are also investigating the company. Authorities around the world are increasingly policing commodities trading and the companies that dominate it, while making a renewed push against market manipulation. According to prosecutors, Heredia directed his co-conspirators to submit bids and offers through S&P Global Platts, a benchmark price publisher, in an effort to artificially change price assessments so his firm could buy fuel oil from another company at a lower price or sell it at a higher price. In one example, in 2016, Heredia directed a co-conspirator to lower the benchmark price 41 times, resulting in hundreds of thousands of dollars in illegal gains for his company, the government said. Read the charging document here “We note charges of attempted manipulation of certain S&P Global Platts assessments but do not believe that any such attempts were successful and no court has ruled to the contrary,” Platts said on Tuesday. U.S. District Judge Charles Breyer didn’t set a date for Heredia’s sentencing at Wednesday’s hearing. It will be discussed at a status conference on Aug. 18. The case is U.S. v. Heredia, 21-cr-00109, U.S. District Court, Northern District of California (San Francisco). Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 1 Perhaps if Glencore pays a decent dividend, all can be forgiven and forgotten! In my opinion, there is no difference between this and what Elon Musk did with the Tesla share price. Hell, the whole world seems to operate like this these days…so it’s a bit rich to single out one man and one company for this. As I said, just my opinion.