Hot and spicy quince chutney made with raisins and sultanas. (Photo: Tony Jackman) This is a chunky chutney, and it’s super hot. If your palate is heat-shy, reduce the quantity of dried chilli. If your palate is more like mine, hit it with that chilli blast. Ingredients 6 quinces, peeled and sliced, including the cores 4 heaped Tbsp sugar 1 glass sweet white wine such as Johannisberger 250 ml apple cider vinegar 1 stick cassia bark 8 cardamom pods 1 tsp each of ground fennel, coriander, cumin 2 Tbsp dried chillies (yes, tablespoons) 2 garlic cloves, chopped finely 1 large onion, chopped fairly small (not too fine, you want to see it in the chutney) 2 handfuls sultanas 2 handfuls seeded raisins Pinch of salt Method Bring all ingredients to the boil in a deep heavy bottomed pot, then turn down the heat to very low and simmer until it reaches the desired consistency. The liquid when it’s ready should be sticky and quite thick. Fish out the cassia bark and the whole cardamom pods if you can spot them. Spoon into sterilised jars. Serve it with any curry or as a side with a bredie. Speaking of which, don’t miss our weekly Throwback Thursday recipe this week. It’s a winner… DM/TGIFood Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Send your recipes to tony@dailymaverick.co.za with a hi-resolution horizontal (landscape) photo. To enquire about Tony Jackman’s book, foodSTUFF (Human & Rousseau) please email him at tony@dailymaverick.co.za Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet