MKMVA spokesperson Carl Niehaus was threatened with suspension after a post attacking ANC Deputy Secretary-General Jessie Duarte in January. (Photo: Gallo Images / Sunday Times / Jackie Clausen) Carl Niehaus has confirmed to Daily Maverick that he is back at work at Luthuli House in the office of ANC Secretary-General Ace Magashule. The uMkhonto weSizwe Military Veterans Association (MKMVA) spokesperson was threatened with suspension after a post attacking ANC Deputy Secretary-General Jessie Duarte in January. He is employed in Magashule’s office from which he runs the MKMVA, a structure without voting rights at the party’s national executive committee or its elective conferences. Niehaus said on Monday morning that he was back at Luthuli House. The letter threatening to suspend him was written by party general manager Febe Potgieter, but Niehaus reportedly wrote a letter of apology to Magashule, who accepted it. Duarte was not part of his reinstatement. Last week, Niehaus also emerged as the organiser of the RET National Operations Committee – a faction shaping up as the vanguard of Magashule’s run for ANC president at its next elective conference, which is still slated to take place in 2022. This committee is organising itself nationally by province and then by branch. The MKMVA comprises foot soldiers, some of whom served in uMkhonto weSizwe, the ANC’s army in exile. Many are too young to have done so. See article: Carl Niehaus tables radical economic transformation plan ahead of Ace Magashule’s campaign for ANC President Niehaus is one of Magashule’s chief lieutenants and organises campaigning events for the secretary-general. One such was when Magashule appeared in court on corruption charges for the second time in February. Another was a march on the Constitutional Court with Wits students who are demanding better student aid and the scrapping of debt. The rest of Team Magashule’s top members include former ambassador to Cuba Justice Pitso, former Cabinet minister Malusi Gigaba, who also works at Luthuli House, and his adviser from the Free State, Chris Akeer. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 9 The Robin Hood soapy can’t get better. All the immoral fraudsters supporting each other. What a bunch of evil psychopaths! Useless, corrupt, parasitic and deceitful to the core! LootHuli House has become a den of the most pernicious and contemptible thieves – an utter disgrace to the country and a once noble movement. Led by none other than that most odious and diabolical magashule! Why does this parasite get so much attention? He’s probably a right-wing mole sent to be stupid! Surely he can’t really believe that rubbish? This dude is an insult to South Africa’s intelligence, as for Magashule he is a thug, very dangerous, so the two of them, the one lies about his mother’s death and the other continues to steal money from the poor, they drive the state to fail so that they can steal more, please arrest them. Carl is delusional to the core. But he is probably planning ahead, thinking that he will be in line for high office (? vice presidency) in the new Magashule cabinet. Unfortunately such is the depth of their communal depravity that he may even get the job. Nothing surprises me any more with the ANC. How convenient that his judge is also his friend. Governance and accountability within the ANC is a joke. Birds of a feather flock together,
Out of the sky they shall fall,
Feathers tarred with crime.
The night of the long knives is coming,
For them the orange overalls do call.
When in prison the birds do meet,
The true patriots of mZansi will have a ball.
A true ethical party South Africa will greet. I won’t even comment on Carl. Does anyone understand the law regarding para-military organisations in South Africa? I understand the role that MK played in the struggle and that the ANC is beholden to their veterans, but the MKMVA appears to me to be more of an armed wing of certain factions of the ANC rather than an “old boys club.” The other aspect that interests me is the age of many veterans. It would appear that when the armed struggle ceased, some had not yet been born. Much like the 20-year-old “War veterans” in Zimbabwe ransacking farms 30 years after Zimbabwean independence. From a legal and equality point of view: If a group of military veterans from the old SADF, eg. the Parabats decided to form the “Bats MVA,” buy camouflage uniforms, berets, parachutes and weapons, and meet regularly to train as a military unit, I would have thought that would be illegal. Am I wrong? My dogs (thoroughbred Labradors) can’t stop barking when his ugly face appears (brown teeth and all) on TV. The same reaction applies to Jacob Zuma. I am sure they know something we don’t. What a looser!