A simple white loaf of bread, easy to make and unfussy. (Photo: Tony Jackman) Ingredients 500 g white bread flour 425 ml warm (not hot) water 10 g yeast 1 tsp salt Method Mix the yeast and water and allow to stand for 10 minutes. Sift the flour and salt together, then mix in the yeast and water. This will produce a sticky dough which can be rolled into a ball, adding flour to your hands. Cover the mixture with a damp cloth and leave to rise for an hour in a warm place. Remove the risen mixture from the bowl with a pastry spatula and place on a floured board. Flatten and knead for about 10 minutes, then form into a loaf and place in a standard bread tin, covered. Leave for about 40 minutes to rise again. Bake at 240℃ for the first 20 minutes and turn down to 200℃ for the last 20 minutes. Remove from the oven when golden brown. TGIFood tip: To create an attractive loaf, when the bread has been kneaded after rising the first time, flatten the dough on a floured bread board and cut into six strips. Roll each of the strips and place side by side in the bread tin. Proceed as above. This is the loaf as illustrated. It cuts perfectly into firm slices. DM/TGIFood Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Send your recipes to tony@dailymaverick.co.za with a hi-resolution horizontal (landscape) photo. To enquire about Tony Jackman’s book, foodSTUFF (Human & Rousseau) please email him at tony@dailymaverick.co.za Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet