Moroccan-style chicken thighs with fresh figs. (Photo: Tony Jackman) Ingredients 2 Tbsp olive oil 8 chicken thighs, skin removed 1 large onion (or 2 medium), cut into quarters or sixths 2 garlic cloves, sliced thinly 4 cm piece of ginger, peeled and sliced thinly 14 small figs 2 tsp ground cumin 1 tsp ground fennel seeds 1 tsp ground coriander ½ tsp ground cinnamon 1 cup chicken stock Salt and pepper to taste Coriander leaves garnish marries superbly Method Peel off the skin from the chicken thighs and discard. Mix the ground cumin, fennel, coriander and cinnamon and sprinkle liberally over both sides of the thighs. Oil the bottom of a tagine and place the chicken thighs all around the edges and one in the centre. Cut the onion into wedges and push them between the thighs. Sprinkle the sliced ginger and garlic all over. Trim the stems off the figs and tuck them in between the thighs and onions, with the cut side facing up. I used late-season red (Parisian/Evita) figs, which are subtly sweet and take the Moroccan spicing perfectly. Season with salt and pepper to taste and pour the chicken stock over. Put the lid on the tagine and bake in a preheated 180℃ oven for 50 minutes to an hour. If there is too much liquid at the end, spoon it into a saucepan, reduce it down and serve it on the plate. Serve with couscous. Garnish with chopped coriander leaves, the flavour of which gives a lovely finish to the impact of the dish. DM/TGIFood Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Send your recipes to tony@dailymaverick.co.za with a hi-resolution horizontal (landscape) photo. To enquire about Tony Jackman’s book, foodSTUFF (Human & Rousseau) please email him at tony@dailymaverick.co.za Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet