By Kate Chappell “This is a great loss for Jamaica and for Reggae,” said Jamaican Prime Minister Andrew Holness, calling him “a respected elder statesman of the Jamaican music scene.” Wailer’s given name was Neville O’Riley Livingston but he was known affectionately as Bunny Wailer, Bunny Livingston or Jah B. He came from Trench Town, a poor inner city community of Kingston that went on to inspire one of the Wailers’ hits. The Grammy-award winning songwriter and percussionist met Marley and Tosh at a young age and the trio formed the Wailers in 1963. Nearly a decade later, the group was signed by producer Chris Blackwell’s Island Records, which lead to their fifth, now classic album, “Catch a Fire” and international fame. Credited with popularizing reggae music, the Wailers toured the world and had several hit songs in the ska and rocksteady styles, including “Simmer Down,” “Lonesome Feeling,” and “Thank You Lord.” Along with Tosh, Livingston eventually left the group to became a solo artist, while Marley began touring with new band members as Bob Marley and the Wailers. Bunny Wailer recorded 10 albums, winning Grammys for Best Reggae Album for “Time Will Tell: A Tribute to Bob Marley” in 1991, “Crucial! Roots Classic” in 1995, and a tribute to Bob Marley in 1997. As a solo artist, his hit songs included “Cool Runnings” and “Bald Head Jesus.” He received several of Jamaica’s highest honors, including the Order of Merit and the Order of Jamaica. In recent years, the father of 13 suffered several strokes. He died on Tuesday after being hospitalized since December for his latest stroke, according to the culture ministry. His wife, Jean Watt, went missing in May 2020. Her whereabouts remain unknown. (Reporting by Kate Chappell in Kingston Editing by Sarah Marsh and Rosalba O’Brien) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet