South African President Cyril Ramaphosa appears on behalf of the ruling party African National Congress (ANC) at the Zondo Commission of Inquiry in Johannesburg Johannesburg, South Africa, 28 April 2021. The Zondo Commission was set up by former President Jacob Zuma to investigate state capture and corruption in the country. (Photo: EPA-EFE/Themba Hadebe / POOL) President Cyril Ramaphosa acknowledged to the people of South Africa that state capture took place under the ANC and that the party did not always live up to the values and principles of the governing party. In his opening statement before the Zondo Commission of Inquiry into state capture, starting four days of testimony, Ramaphosa said that leaders and members of the ANC had been part of state capture. “State capture took place under our watch,” he told Judge Zondo without going into any detail in a statement that ran at just under an hour. But he defined culpability to a small circle, saying that “the vast majority of ANC leaders, members and cadres are vehemently opposed to corruption in all its manifestations.” Ramaphosa appeared before the Commission voluntarily unlike his predecessor former president Jacob Zuma, who has ignored a series of summons to give testimony in the 40 different areas of interest he has been implicated in during the almost three years of sitting of the Commission. State capture is broadly defined as the period beginning from around 2011 to the end of 2017 when an estimated R1.2-trillion in public finances and public opportunities was extracted from South Africa by two key patronage networks. The Commission must determine if it existed, how it functioned and how this form of grand corruption can be prevented in future. “I was talking to a fellow head of state and I said I would be appearing before the Commission and he said ‘Argh! How can you do that?’ and I said ‘this is how our democracy works,’” said Ramaphosa in his opening words.  He compared the Zondo Commission to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission which started hearings 25 years ago. “I appear before the Commission not to make excuses or defend the indefensible,” said Ramaphosa as he testified to the long tail of corruption in South Africa. “Corruption is not a new phenomenon in South Africa – the apartheid system was morally and systematically corrupt,” he said.  He said that the ANC had first been explicitly told about the Gupta family’s growing influence in government when Transport Minister Fikile Mbalula (then sports minister) revealed in a party executive committee meeting that he had been told of his portfolio by a Gupta brother. “At the time, the statement did not prompt any specific concerns. More reports began to surface (about the) capture of state enterprises and the undue influence of the Gupta family in executive positions and appointments. The issue of state capture became increasingly a subject of discussion. (But) corruption is covert activity.  Without direct evidence and without investigative capability, it is difficult to confront,” said Ramaphosa. Testimony continues. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 13 From what I’ve watched Pretorius is being far too gentle and letting Ramaphosa get away with not answering the difficult questions. I hope this changes. Zondo has asked more pointed questions. Could not agree more. Pretorius needs to push harder. I want to know what happened in the Eskom war room that CR was in charge of? What did he do when Nene was fired? What did he do about Dudu Myeni? He must provide proof of his “attempts” to stop things. He was deputy president. He is implicated This is more like banter between friends rather than an enquiry into the biggest criminal organisation in the country. “I appear before the Commission not to make excuses or defend the indefensible – first this statement followed by this “Corruption is not a new phenomenon in South Africa – sounds like a defense / excuse to me. Not sure I believe he is sincere… “he defined culpability to a small circle, saying that “the vast majority of ANC leaders, members and cadres are vehemently opposed to corruption in all its manifestations.” So where are the orange suits? That big “small circle” must go to jail! “But he defined culpability to a small circle”, the size of the circles is not as important as the influence it has. And that is HUGE! Maybe I am mistaken…I think you mean ‘confine’ as in limited to…not define? He would like us to believe this confine definition, whereas the issue is bigger in that the entire ‘party’ was involved on the basis of party politics…instead of principle. The ‘opposition’ was the ‘enemy’! Too much like old pals
Disappointed it all happened when he was in
Cabinet. Tomorrow last chance I wonder who Ramaphosa’s “fellow head of state” was.
Sickening. But he is our best hope… ANC MPs wilfully failed to hold the Zuma executive to account. They and party members kept Zuma in power for nine ruinous years, despite increasingly overwhelming evidence. Cabinet, including the current President, must have been aware of what was going on. And the corruption still continues. The anc should pay back the money. And he still calls Zuma his “leader” and “elder” what a joke. And he hasn’t cleaned out a single crook or criminal in the ANC elite. Ramaphosa is costing the country big. A “small circle”??????? What about the massive corruption and theft by hundreds if not thousands of ANC cadres in municipalities and SOEs all over the place???? Get real Mr Ramaphosa.