Tony Jackman’s sticky chicken wings. (Photo: Tony Jackman) Stoepsit? It’s a Karoo thing. You invite a couple of friends over for a chin wag on your stoep while you watch the sun go down and tell stories of the derring-do of the veld and strange Karoo habits. You take a plate of “Karoo tapas”, which in my case was these oven-baked wings drenched in a sweetly sticky baste. Sit, sip, eat, tell stories. That’s living. Ingredients Friends A stoep Whisky and wine Stories 18 chicken wings ½ cup Mrs HS Balls peach chutney ½ cup honey Juice of 2 lemons 1 tsp ground cumin 1 tsp ground ginger 1 tsp garlic salt 1 tsp sriracha or other dry chilli mix Olive oil Method Preheat the oven to 220℃. Snip off the wing tips. (Freeze for a future chicken stock.) In a bowl, mix the chutney, honey, lemon juice and spices (not the friends, you add them to the mix later) and salt. Douse the wings in it, massaging them with your hands. Oil a baking tray. Place the wings side by side and drizzle over the remaining baste. Bake until cooked to the bone, about 50 minutes to an hour. Turn the wings over after 25 minutes. My gas oven being the temperamental creature that it is, they took up to an hour and 10 minutes to turn golden, but an electric oven will cook them a fair bit faster. Either way, they’re only done when cooked to the bone and beautifully browned. DM/TGIFood To enquire about Tony Jackman’s book, foodSTUFF (Human & Rousseau) please email him at tony@dailymaverick.co.za Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Send your recipes to tony@dailymaverick.co.za with a hi-resolution horizontal (landscape) photo. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet