ANC National Chairperson Gwede Mantashe at the Zondo Commission in November 2018. (Photo by Gallo Images / Sowetan / Masi Losi) Mantashe’s opening statement dealt with cadre deployment, the party’s relationship with the Gupta family and with how the system of parliamentary oversight works in a party-led, proportional representation electoral system. “No ANC MP was told to stop thinking,” said Mantashe as he explained how the party views parliamentary oversight. He spoke about how the party had come to be influenced and ensnared by the Gupta family and its patronage networks. “A few years after arriving, Mr Ajay Gupta became a member of President Thabo Mbeki’s International Advisory Council. [Later], he approached the ANC to establish ANN7 and The New Age,” said Mantashe, explaining that the ANC had welcomed the opportunity to diversify the media. “We needed diversity. At that stage we did not know their other businesses.  What we know today, we didn’t know then,” he said, adding that the party only clicked to the family’s shenanigans when it landed a private wedding plane at Waterkloof Air Force Base in 2013 and when Transport Minister Fikile Mbalula (then serving in a different portfolio) remarked during an ANC NEC meeting that he had been told of his deployment by the family.  As the family’s hold over the state became clearer, the ANC did not tell its MP’s not to ask questions or “stop thinking”, said Mantashe. Mantashe said he realised ANC MPs could face tension between party loyalty and loyalty to voters. “We have stressed they should apply their minds to their purpose in Parliament [which is to] enhance the developmental agenda. They should be thinking MPs [but] South Africa is a very young democracy, and we should tread with caution when making majority decisions like the removal of a president. “I have experienced a party removing two of its former presidents, and the consequence [was] a breakaway from the ANC [the formation of the now-defunct COPE].” Mantashe said the party did not believe in the “Samson Option”, where MPs had to be made to choose between party and state. The party did not encourage willy-nilly support for motions of no-confidence in Parliament. “We can’t create a crisis and collapse the country. All parties operate caucus systems [which exercise party control].” The party did not have a cadre deployment policy but a deployment policy, “and it makes a huge difference”. Mantashe replaced ANC Secretary-General Ace Magashule, who was supposed to have represented the party at the Zondo Commission. Commission chairperson Judge Raymond Zondo announced that President Cyril Ramaphosa would no longer appear before the commission on 22 and 23 April due to state obligations.  He would still appear on 28 and 29 April. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 11 It would be naive to believe Samson’s view that they did not know then what they know now.
He is a master of deception who has cut his political teeth in the tough world of coal mine unions and it is his job to do some damage control on behalf of the cANCer. To play ignorant is a lame excuse. Ignorant for a month or so yes… After that … happiness … money to be made! He chose the first month of ignorance to comment on… thinking we are going to buy it. Halleluja etc. And some people will … for a month or so. Using a moral stance like a thief in a candy shop. Agge nee. So not much of any gravitas was said at all really. “What we know today, we didn’t know then,” I guess that sums it up. And there was us thinking that Gwede Mantashe’s ANC was qualified to run the country! He knows the truth … and uses it as a barometer against which to construe lies. He may outwit God one day. And that’s just that. No one knows how clever or stupid God is. Gwede will wake up one day and find that it wasn’t a bad dream but a reality created by him and his mates. Not to worry, the wealth derived will support several generations of non workers. I wish the evidence leader would ask him if he is willing to apologise to South Africa for protecting JZ in the numerous votes of no confidence now that he apparently have all the facts that they did not have then. I want to watch him squirm around that question. So.. When they did suspect something was up… what did any of them.. the NEC, the party structures, individual MPs the veterans, branches. the struggle heroes, the Mbeki faction on early retirement.. Do?
Nada.. A total moral failure. Absolute nonsense! This is nothing but a cop out and meant to sanitize the putrid anc from their failure and responsibility in grand theft from the taxpayer and every SA citizen. The public knew what the Guptas and their enablers were all about. It is a case of turning a blind eye to the corruption/state capture, shielding and abetting the culprits as they are anc cadres. Only when this obnoxious party realized that they were going to lose support did they start to move on corruption. Being dragged kicking and screaming I might add. Mantashe is disingenuous at the very least, nothing but a party hack who put and continues to put party interests above those of the country. Another lying low life so endemic in the rotten stinking party that it has become.