Tony Jackman’s curried mince frittata. (Photo: Tony Jackman) Curried mince the old Cape way is not shy on the turmeric in its spice mix. Serve it with Mrs HS Ball’s chutney. Adjust the quantities of spices according to your taste; those given are for a fairly mild curry, to my palate (having said that, what I find mild has some people reaching for the iced water). And of course you can add a chopped chilli if you want to… Ingredients 2 Tbsp coconut oil 700 g lean beef mince 1 onion, chopped 1 or 2 garlic cloves, chopped 1 x 400 g can chopped tomatoes 1 heaped tsp masala 1 heaped tsp ground turmeric ½ tsp ground cumin ½ tsp ground fennel ½ tsp ground coriander Salt and pepper to taste 6 large eggs Coriander leaves for garnish Mrs HS Ball’s chutney for serving Method Preheat the oven to 200℃. Heat the coconut oil in an ovenproof deep frying pan, add the onion and garlic and cook on a low heat until the onions are softened, while stirring. Stir in all the spices and cook for 2 or 3 minutes more. Add the tomato, season with salt, stir, and cook on a low heat for a minute or two. Add the mince and work it in with a wooden spoon so that it does not form clumps. Simmer gently on a low heat for about 25 to 30 minutes. You need most of the liquid to cook away but don’t let it get too dry. You also don’t want the mince to catch at the bottom of the pan. Break 6 eggs into a bowl, season with salt and pepper, whisk, and pour it over the mince. Bake in the preheated oven until the egg is just set, about 20 minutes. Garnish with chopped coriander and serve with chutney. DM/TGIFood To enquire about Tony Jackman’s book, foodSTUFF (Human & Rousseau) please email him at tony@dailymaverick.co.za Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Send your recipes to tony@dailymaverick.co.za with a hi-resolution horizontal (landscape) photo. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet