We continue to build our technology with safety in mind. Here are just a few ways we do this: We require delivery-drivers to follow a stringent onboarding process before they can deliver with the Uber Eats app. As part of our commitment to safety, we have started the process of implementing vehicle inspections on all vehicles registered on the app, in addition to our standard onboarding process. All vehicles when on-boarded must also have an RSA vehicle license disc. With South Africa now in level 1, we are actively working to better our support and onboarding process as well as streamlining the vehicle inspections. We are engaging with the government on both the local and national levels to clear any backlogs on their end for both drivers and delivery-partners. All Uber Eats delivery-partners are covered by Injury Protection, from Chubb Insurance South Africa Limited – this is from the moment they accept a delivery request, right through to when the delivery is completed. We also require all motorbike delivery-partners to wear helmets in accordance with the law, as well as reflective jackets which have been provided by Chubb. South Africa’s weather patterns can be unpredictable, which is why we monitor weather conditions. Depending on the forecast, we may inform delivery-partners that the conditions may be hazardous and remind them of the importance of taking extra care when they’re making deliveries. We may operate on a limited basis in an area experiencing bad weather conditions and provide useful tips to help prioritize their safety on the roads. Delivery-partners who use the Uber Eats app are independent operators who choose when and where they operate. If they are not comfortable driving or delivering in certain areas or during bad weather conditions, they’re completely free to go offline and come back online when they choose. Couriers have access to a safety toolkit in the driver app where they have access to the in-app emergency button to call a third-party security company. They can also share their trip with friends and family to track the location & status of the trip. Included in the driver app is a Safety & Security help node that has details around the Injury Protection policy available to couriers, which also offers couriers an easy way to claim in-app. We are also excited to announce our latest safety feature, known as Emergency Contacts, that will be used by Uber’s Incident Response Team to contact the courier’s relatives in case of an accident and/or for insurance purposes. While Covid-19 has changed how certain things happen, we have ensured that our virtual communication remains strong. We send out regular communications on safety tips, driver features and updates through our virtual driver channels and customer support channels remain available to them 24/7. Safety isn’t our only priority and the well-being of delivery-drivers has and continues to be our focus. South Africa has seen several challenges in the last year and to ensure we unlock access to increased opportunities, last year we accelerated our launch into essential delivery, ensuring we offer more than just food and rolled out Uber Connect for the transportation of packages to unlock further earning opportunities. We will continue to build our technology with safety in mind while ensuring our platforms can be a bridge to a sustainable economic recovery. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet