In addition to life cover that pays out if you pass away, you can also cover your spouse under the same policy. This means that if something should happen to either breadwinner, your family is protected. Managed by the Alexander Forbes Trust & Beneficiary Fund Services, this benefit covers the education and living costs of your minor children in the event of your death before retirement age. This is a crucial complementary product to normal life cover, as it ensures your children’s future. Modern life is stressful and statistics 1 show that mental and social disorders are rising rapidly. These include anxiety and panic, financial stress and pressure, depression, poor family relations, feelings of suicide, and substance abuse. Timely and effective support can prevent the normal demands of life from turning into serious mental and emotional issues. Your benefits package can provide a range of products and services, which can safeguard both your financial and physical and emotional well-being. However, not all benefits packages are equal. At Alexander Forbes, we partner with your employer to design a personalised benefits package to target your needs. This means you can ask your employer to add relevant services, such as those discussed earlier, to your package. Additionally, the financial advice you receive will always be tailored to your and your family’s particular needs and circumstances. Your group risk products, such as life and disability cover, are generally priced at institutional rates. This means you benefit from lower fees due to group economies of scale. You would not necessarily have access to this pricing without going for a medical if you tried to source this in your individual capacity. This is why it’s worth your time to fully understand the benefits your employer offers, and make full use of them. To ensure your financial and physical well-being – count on your employee benefits. DM  1. https://www.sadag.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=3091&Itemid=483 Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet