With the new benefit, members can now save 25% upfront on a wide range of sports gear and equipment and fitness devices at Sportsmans Warehouse and Totalsports. And Vitality and Discovery Bank clients can save up to 75% upfront on qualifying fitness devices and Nike performance footwear and apparel at Sportsmans Warehouse, Totalsports and Nike stores (excluding Nike Factory stores and Nike.com). Vitality has made a global commitment to get 100 million people 20% more active by 2025. This bold aspiration resonates with Nike’s drive to bring inspiration and innovation to every athlete in the world by uniting them through sport to create a healthy planet and active communities. “It has always been a priority for Vitality to keep innovating at the intersection of wellness, physical activity and technology. Collaborating with world-class partners is key to keeping our members motivated and active using incentives backed by behavioural science,” says Dinesh Govender, Vitality’s CEO. “The events of the past year showed us the importance of putting to market an agile programme that meets the changing needs of our members. Vitality Active Gear is testament to this and we’re hugely excited about this pioneering benefit.” How to get started To get 25% off, Vitality members simply need to activate Vitality Active Rewards on the Discovery app for an initial 10% upfront discount with Vitality Active Gear, then find out their Vitality Age online and complete a Vitality Health Check or Virtual Vitality Health Check-in for an additional 15% off. Then, by getting active and achieving their weekly Vitality Active Rewards exercise goals, members can increase their discount to 50% – the discount increases by 5% for every five Vitality Active Rewards exercise goals achieved. Upgrade your bank, upgrade your gear and save even more For a massive 75% upfront discount on Vitality Active Gear, join Discovery Bank and access your personalised discount based on your product type and card colour, qualifying spend and Vitality Money status. This means that members can save from 10% to 75% upfront on qualifying fitness devices and Nike performance footwear and apparel if they’re a Vitality Health member with a qualifying Discovery Bank product and Vitality Money. There’s no activation fee for this enhanced benefit and all members have to do is activate Vitality Active Rewards to start working towards maximum discounts. The Vitality Active Gear benefit replaces the HealthyGear, Shoe Booster, Device Booster and Bike Booster benefits, providing members with a much more inclusive, card-free offering. Learn more on Vitality’s latest news page or Facebook, Twitter or Instagram. DM  About Discovery Discovery Limited is a South African-founded financial services organisation that operates in the healthcare, life assurance, short-term insurance, savings and investment and wellness markets. Since its inception in 1992, Discovery has been guided by a clear core purpose – to make people healthier and to enhance and protect their lives. This has manifested in its globally recognised Vitality Shared-value Insurance model, active in 24 markets with over 20 million members. The model is exported and scaled through the Global Vitality Network, an alliance of some of the largest insurers in key markets, including AIA (Asia), Ping An (China), Generali (Europe), Sumitomo (Japan), John Hancock (US), Manulife (Canada) and Vitality Life & Health (UK, wholly owned). Discovery trades on the Johannesburg Securities Exchange as DSY. Follow us on Twitter @Discovery_SA About Vitality Vitality is the largest platform for behaviour change globally, underpinning the insurance products of 14 leading global insurers, with more than 20 million members in 24 countries. It is a leading behaviour-change programme that underpins insurance and financial services, creating shared value by combining behavioural economics and clinical science to encourage and reward members for exercising more, eating healthier, managing stress, and looking after and improving their health. For more information, please visit the  Vitality Website  or email media_relations_team@discovery.co.za. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet