“Think warm, spicy, rich, creamy aromas to slow roasts, pies and the Classic Bread and Butter pudding. Our menu boasts some South African favourites made with a classic twist,” says Head Chef Jamie Sutherland. He says the menu at the newly launched restaurant in Brooklyn, Pretoria, features dishes made from homegrown produce to support local farmers. Autumn/Winter Menu Highlights The starter menu highlights include sautéed Warm Chicken Livers with a creamy green peppercorn sauce served in a crispy potato skin basket, and a classic Steak Tartare cut from prime fillet steak, made with cured egg yolk and accompanied by a light tartare sauce and teriyaki sauce to lift the flavour combination. New dishes featured on the main course menu are a bean casserole infused with chorizo sausage for a warm kick, served with a Slow Roasted Marinated Lamb Shank – marinated for 36 hours, then slow-roasted for eight hours. The Grilled Venison Pie with red wine infused gemsbok is cooked with lovely chunky vegetables to produce a rich thick stew. This is topped with a light puff pastry lid and served with a smooth parmesan mash. The Kassler Pork Chop is marinated for three days before being lightly smoked in the Mibrasa oven for two hours to give it a distinct smoky flavour and it is then char-grilled to perfection. The dish is served with a warm baby potato salad with green beans and a light vinaigrette dressing. A roasted red pepper salsa adds a little kick to the dish. The slow-cooked Succulent Pork Belly has distinct flavours of cumin and thyme and is served with sweet potato mash infused with grated Granny Smith apple, braised red cabbage and a grain mustard and cream sauce. For vegetarians the Grilled Butternut Salad is a must have, served with mixed leaves, cream cheese, garlic dressing, dried cranberries, toasted pumpkin seeds and crispy onions. New desserts added include the tale of the Decadent Cream Tart. The melt-in-your-mouth sweet pastry crumbles to reveal a smooth chocolate sponge with a layer of rich chocolate ganache topped with strawberry curd and finished with a creamy crème patisserie. The blood orange sorbet when combined with a spoonful of the tart brings out the sheer beauty of this dish. The Chocolate Smore, with a salty crunchy base and a rich chocolate mousse, is topped with toasted marshmallow and a thin layer of fresh raspberries to cut through the sweetness. The restaurant’s home-made coffee ice cream adds to the combination of textures and flavours.  The Millionaire Shortbread will have you nostalgic for Granny’s desserts. This crumbly shortbread is topped with rich salted caramel and covered in dark chocolate. For a little extra treat, we serve it with Cointreau-infused orange bonbons and a home-made bitter orange ice cream. The Coconut Panna Cotta consists of toasted coconut-infused cream and a raspberry sponge combined with a delightful surprise – a beetroot jelly and a home-made rose and beetroot sorbet. When you combine all the components on your spoon and place It in your mouth, the flavours explode into a heavenly delight. Passion-Fruit Brulee is a flavourful rich cream dessert, topped with crunchy caramel. The home-made pomegranate and black pepper sorbet helps to reduce the richness but takes nothing away from the flavours. The Classic Bread and Butter pudding layers brioche coated in butter and apricot jam, together with dried cranberries and is baked with a fresh egg and cardamom flavoured custard. The dessert is complemented by home-made cinnamon ice cream and fresh cream. “If my mother made bread and butter pudding like this, I wouldn’t have left home. Our menu has everything for everyone, and I have no doubt you’ll be back for more,” concludes Chef Jamie. Meet the Chef: Jamie Sutherland The Grillroom & Sushi Bar’s Head Chef, Jamie Sutherland has 36 years cooking experience under his toque with a formidable career that has taken him across kitchens in Europe, Asia and Africa. Jamie trained as a chef in the United Kingdom and started his career in 1984 in Scotland where he worked for a couple of hotel restaurants before moving to London for the next decade honing his skills at top restaurants. “I’ve been privileged to travel widely and had vast experience with French, Asian, Middle Eastern and African cuisine. My style of food is modern with classic overtures but the most important ingredient in any dish is passion. I cook with heart and aim to enhance the full flavour of each dish,” says Jamie. His love for cooking is only paralleled by his love for teaching and mentoring. “I am the sum of the many great chefs I’ve worked under and that same desire to continue learning is what drives me to take junior chefs under my wing and share my knowledge. In teaching, you also learn and continue growing.” Meet the GM – Mark Williams Passion and service excellence are the front and centre of hospitality says Mark Williams, the new General Manager at The Grillroom & Sushi Bar. “The customer facing service of the restaurant needs to equally match the amazing food coming out of our pristine kitchen – our peerless backend” says Williams who trained at the Swiss Hotel Management School in Switzerland and obtained a BA Honours in Hospitality and Events Management. The well-groomed restauranteur’s friendly nature and professionalism reflect his thirteen years’ experience as a manager at leading restaurants in South Africa’s economic hubs of Johannesburg, Pretoria and Cape Town. He understands the importance of providing consistent quality dining experiences. “The stakes are high in this industry, now more than ever, and the customer demands real value for money. Providing consistent high quality dining experiences is a non-negotiable,” says Williams. The Grillroom & Sushi Bar’s head chef Jamie Sutherland says Williams brings an energetic vibe and elegance to the restaurant. “Williams is an effective communicator with intimate knowledge on operating both the front and back of house seamlessly and profitably which he shares selflessly with the team.’’ DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet