The scene this morning around University of Cape Town, Sunday April 18, 2021. Maverick Insider Tim Richman Temperatures soared to over 30 degrees Celsius as a fire broke out on the eastern flanks of Table Mountain on Sunday morning during near-windless conditions. Enormous smoke columns could be seen from across the city billowing into the cloud-free sky over the city’s southern suburbs and near the University of Cape Town (UCT).  Video clip by Maverick Insider Tim Richman  According to the City of Cape Town, its fire and rescue service had been alerted to the blaze at 8.45am. “Fire crews were immediately dispatched to the scene, with the fire currently spreading from Rhodes Memorial toward UCT,” the City noted on its Twitter account.  Video clip by Maverick Insider Tim Richman  “A section of the tea room at Rhodes Memorial has been destroyed and people are urged not to enter the area,” it added. “More resources are currently on their way to assist. These include teams from Working on Fire and Table Mountain National Park. Three choppers are also water bombing.” NCC Wildfires, the firefighting services contracted to South African National Parks (SANParks), reported that the vegetation fire had started above Philip Kgosana Drive in the game camp area between UCT and Hospital Bend junction. In the meantime, SANParks requested “all hikers within the Newlands and Rhodes Memorial area to evacuate with immediate effect. Cars parked within these sections need to be moved as a matter of urgency. “The fire is currently out of control and we request that all onlookers please refrain from entering the area and keep the area clear for emergency vehicles to pass.” This is a developing story. We will add details as they emerge. DM/OBP  Updates  Emergency numbers  Read Daily Maverick/Our Burning Planet’s recent in-depth fire coverage on Table Mountain here: Pyrocene Cape: Inside the furnace of Table Mountain’s fire starters SANParks traces Oudekraal blaze to homeless camper Cape Town’s Halloween fire ignited by ‘vagrants’ — SANParks   Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 2 The clip showing the chopper collecting water to douse the fire, suggests the pilots are engaged in some ‘risky’ undertaking – a heroic effort/task ! Tragedy! Yet I guess students, whom wants everything for free, will either celebrate (the free everything seeking ones), or the opposite whom will cry (the serious students despite hardships)