Celebrate 10 years of Game of Thrones with the Iron Anniversary. Stream the cast reunion hosted by the legendary Conan O’Brien, featuring fan favourites like Emilia Clarke, Kit Harington, Peter Dinklage, Maisie Williams, Jason Momoa and more. The two-part special will be streaming on Showmax from 8 April. In the meantime, binge all eight seasons, and stream Game of Thrones: The Last Watch and Game of Thrones: Behind the Scenes which both focus on the filming of the final season.   Billionaire Robert Durst was suspected of multiple crimes, but maintained his innocence. In exclusive interviews, Durst reveals secrets that have baffled authorities for 30 years in this Emmy-winning HBO documentary. Watch this one to the very last second, as his murder trial continues in April.   Explore the meaning of fame and influence in the digital age through an innovative social experiment. Three people with relatively small followings are turned into influencers overnight.  This Oscar winning documentary examines the issue of honour killings through the story of one Pakistani woman. Hours after her marriage to a man her family deemed unsuitable, her father and uncle kidnapped and shot her, leaving her for dead in a river. Surviving the crime was just the start of her struggle.   HBO presents an intimate portrait of Tiger Woods, telling the real story of his road to riches and fame, which led him on to ruin and, finally, redemption.   Academy Award winner Alex Gibney directs a documentary investigating the rise and fall of Theranos, the one-time multibillion-dollar healthcare company founded by Elizabeth Holmes.   Also watch:   In the last years of Victoria’s reign, London is beset by the Touched: people – mostly women – who suddenly manifest abnormal abilities – some charming, some disturbing. Among them are Amalia True, a mysterious, quick-fisted widow, and Penance Adair, a brilliant young inventor. They are the champions of this new underclass, making a home for the Touched, while fighting the forces of… well, pretty much all the forces – to make room for those whom history as we know it has no place. This new fantasy series by Joss Whedon (The Avengers) has been dubbed “The Magicians meets Bridgerton”. High praise! Stream from 19 April.   Two androids are tasked with raising human children on a mysterious planet when the Earth is destroyed in a great war. A new HBO sci-fi series from executive producer Ridley Scott.   The most watched HBO series of 2020, The Undoing stars Nicole Kidman and Hugh Grant, a seemingly perfect couple whose entire world falls apart when he is accused of murder. The twisty, turny thriller will have you guessing till the last moment.   A black man sets out across 1950s Jim Crow America in search of his missing father. What follows is a struggle to survive and overcome both the evils of racism and some pretty terrifying monsters.   This 2001 miniseries isn’t new, but it set the benchmark for the telling of wartime tales. Created by Tom Hanks and Steven Spielberg, it won the Emmy and Golden Globe. It follows the exploits of a WWII parachute battalion from jump training in the US to its participation in battles in Europe to the end of the war. Also watch the documentary about the real soldiers in We Stand Alone Together: The Men of Easy Company.  Also watch:  Stream all of this on Showmax. Subscribe now » DM/ML Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet