By David Lawder The $2 billion is part of a pool of some $12 billion that the World Bank has made available overall for vaccine development, distribution and production in low-and middle-income countries, van Trotsenburg told a World Bank forum. David Malpass, the World Bank’s president, said in separate remarks https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/speech/2021/04/09/remarks-by-world-bank-group-president-david-malpass-to-the-spring-meetings-2021-development-committee to the lender’s development committee that the bank expects this to expand to $4 billion worth of commitments in 50 countries by mid-year. But public health officials at the same forum warned that a race between the coronavirus and the vaccines meant to stop it could be lost if the pace of vaccinations in the developing world did not pick up. World Health Organization (WHO) director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said that existing vaccines could be rendered ineffective if the virus continues to spread and mutate. “Even those countries who have high coverage of vaccines will not be secure because the new variants that may not be stopped by the vaccines we have, will invade the countries that may have even 100% coverage in a few months,” he said. Tedros called for more political will to boost production of COVID-19 vaccines and share supplies, including through stalled intellectual property waiver on vaccines through the World Trade Organization. The WTO’s Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property, or TRIPS waiver was the “elephant in the room” holding back vaccine production, Tedros said, adding that it was meant for emergencies such as the coronavirus pandemic. “We haven’t seen any emergency like this in our lifetime. If we cannot use it now, then when are we going to use it?” Tedros asked. “The mother of all these bottlenecks is lack of political will.” (Reporting by David Lawder in Washington and Stephanie Nebehay in Geneva; editing by Diane Craft) Information pertaining to Covid-19, vaccines, how to control the spread of the virus and potential treatments is ever-changing. Under the South African Disaster Management Act Regulation 11(5)(c) it is prohibited to publish information through any medium with the intention to deceive people on government measures to address COVID-19. We are therefore disabling the comment section on this article in order to protect both the commenting member and ourselves from potential liability. Should you have additional information that you think we should know, please email letters@dailymaverick.co.za