Firefighters battle a raging fire in Vredehoek in gale-force winds and heavy smoke on 19 April 2021 in Cape Town. (Photo: Gallo Images / Brenton Geach) A monstrous fire laid siege to the city of Cape Town and its mountain during a global pandemic. The southeaster unleashed its might over the city. Historical landmarks burnt. Capetonians fled their homes in face masks, vulnerable people were stripped of their belongings and students were evacuated from a sanctuary of learning at the foothills of Table Mountain. The international community watched as the unfolding disaster echoed in world headlines and six firefighters were injured in the trenches. And, amid the bedlam and the inferno, unimaginable devastation would have been felt by the residents who could not speak for themselves – the plants and wildlife of Table Mountain National Park, a World Heritage site. Starting on Sunday, 18 April at 8.45am, reportedly as a result of a cooking fire, the blaze that burnt hundreds of hectares was finally contained on the afternoon of Tuesday, 20 April. A second fire, under investigation, may have been ignited by an arsonist. “I have such deep appreciation for the efforts of the City of Cape Town under Mayor Dan Plato, Table Mountain National Park, Working on Fire and Volunteer Wildfire Services, as well as the SANDF, who were all supported by the Western Cape government,” said Premier Alan Winde on Tuesday. Aerial resources are currently deployed and fighting the #CapeTownFire. #DidYouKnow The Huey helicopters that have been dispatched flies an approximate 4,000 hours and responds to an average of 300 fires annually@TableMountainNP @environmentza @CityofCT pic.twitter.com/Ra7G4g6H0k — Working on Fire (@wo_fire) April 20, 2021  “I especially want to thank the hard-working men and women who are serving on the frontline, risking their lives to put a stop to the fires. Their efforts have been nothing short of heroic. I also want to thank the many NGOs, private businesses and residents in the province who have generously made donations to support our firefighters’ efforts. “It is incredibly heart-warming to see how we have come together as a province and as a city in this time of crisis to save our mountain and heritage sites.” Here’s how it happened:    Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 1 Visually powerful but a couple of picky points on the text. The wind started in the morning as an unexpectedly strong and short-lived North-West, and shifted through West to almost gale force South-East overnight. That’s important, because so often the pattern of our major fires involves shifting winds which move them in unexpected directions and into unreachable mountain areas — from which they can regenerate for days. And the Jagger was built in the 1930s, which makes it less than 100 years old, not almost 200 — still a tragedy, but lets get the facts right.