Cheesy potato breakfast pan. (Photo: Tony Jackman) Ingredients 4 large eggs 3 large potatoes Strong Cheddar cheese, lots, grated Thyme, salt and pepper to season Butter and about half a cup of water Method Use a frying pan with a lid. Peel the potatoes and slice thinly in rounds/scallops. Liberally grease a frying pan with butter. Layer the potatoes in the frying pan and sprinkle with picked fresh thyme leaves. Then pour the water over the potatoes, place the frying pan over a low heat and cover with a lid. Let the potatoes cook through evenly and when they appear cooked, test with a fork. Add salt and pepper to taste to the eggs, beat and pour over the potatoes. Return the pan to the hob, again covered, until the eggs are cooked (do not stir). Cover the mixture in the frying pan liberally with the cheese; you can either melt the cheese over the eggs and potatoes on the hob, again covered with a lid, or put the frying pan into the oven under the grill setting. Slice and serve when cooked. It makes a great breakfast dish or lunch when served with a crisp salad. TGIFood tip: Members of the family who have suffered from hangovers swear that a sure cure is to add chilli to the egg mix. I am told it works like a charm. DM/TGIFood Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Send your recipes to tony@dailymaverick.co.za with a hi-resolution horizontal (landscape) photo. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet