Jan 25, 2021, 10:10 AM Asian stocks and U.S. and European equity futures rose Monday as investors focused on the prospect of additional fiscal stimulus and supportive Federal Reserve policy amid the worsening pandemic. Naspers advanced as much as 8.1%, the most in 10 months, to a new all-time high as Tencent jumped 11% in Hong Kong, the most since 2011. Naspers subsidiary, Prosus NV, which holds the company’s 31% stake in Tencent, climbed 7.4% to the highest level since the company was carved out of the tech investor in September 2019. Tencent Jumps as Citi Boosts Target, Kuaishou Seeks $5.4b IPO Woolworths climbed 15% after saying it experienced improved trading momentum across all businesses in the final six weeks of the period ended Dec. 27. Woolworths 26-Week Sales Rose 5.3%; Sees Higher Earnings Woolworths led gains in an index of general retailers, which climbs as much as 3.2%, rising for a third day. Gauge of mining stocks rose 0.7% as gold producers joined diversified miners to drive the index higher. Index of bank stocks drops for a fourth consecutive session, falling 1.4% to the lowest intraday level since Jan. 5, with lenders among those causing the biggest drag on the index. Old Mutual Ltd. drops 1.7% after profit warning, dragging insurers down 0.8% Foreigners remained net sellers of South African stocks for a third consecutive day Friday, disposing of 266 million rand worth of shares, according to exchange operator JSE Ltd. You want more news on this market? Click here for a curated First Word channel of actionable news from Bloomberg and select sources. It can be customized to your preferences by clicking into Actions on the toolbar or hitting the HELP key for assistance. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet