Jan 26, 2021, 9:54 AM Tencent lost as much as 6.7% in Hong Kong on Tuesday, as traders took profit after Monday’s 11% surge, which was Tencent’s biggest in almost a decade. Investors were also concerned by comments by an adviser to China’s central bank indicating that excessive liquidity and ultra-low borrowing costs were creating bubbles in the stock market. NOTE: Tencent Tumbles After Stock Approached $1 Trillion Valuation Naspers fell 3.5% from a fresh record close, the biggest decline since Dec. 28, and causing the strongest drag on the overall market. Prosus, which holds Naspers’ 31% stake in Tencent, declined 3.3%, the biggest drop in more than two weeks. Globally, risk sentiment took a beating as investors mulled a possible delay in the planned U.S. fiscal-relief package against a backdrop of concerns that some markets are overextended. South African stocks have spent their longest period in technically overbought territory since 2005, with the relative strength index on the benchmark index above the level of 70 that signals to some traders that gains may be excessive for 14 days in a row. The sequence was snapped Tuesday, as the RSI dropped to 67. Sibanye Stillwater Ltd. joined platinum and gold companies to pull miners lower for a third day, with the sector index dropping 0.3%. Index heavyweight Richemont dropped 0.7%. Sasol Ltd. retreated for a fifth consecutive session, the longest losing streak since Oct. 16, as oil prices slipped with a resurgent Covid-19 outbreak in some regions and a slow roll-out of vaccinations weighing on the demand outlook, offsetting tightening global supply. An index of general retailers halted a three-day rally, falling 0.4% Foreigners remained net sellers of South African stocks for a fourth consecutive day Monday, disposing of 219 million rand worth of shares, according to exchange operator JSE Ltd. You want more news on this market? Click here for a curated First Word channel of actionable news from Bloomberg and select sources. It can be customized to your preferences by clicking into Actions on the toolbar or hitting the HELP key for assistance. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet