By Josh Wingrove
Jan 7, 2021, 11:07 AM – Updated on Jan 7, 2021, 11:41 AM
Word Count: 307
“Even though I totally disagree with the outcome of the election, and the facts bear me out, nevertheless there will be an orderly transition on January 20th,” Trump said in a statement posted on Twitter by his aide Dan Scavino early Thursday morning. Trump’s statement came as staff resign and as congressional allies have abandoned him in the aftermath of a mob of his supporters laying siege to the Capitol on Wednesday. Trump had repeated his pledge that he would never concede at a rally earlier Wednesday. Joint Session Of Congress Held To Confirm Presidential Election Result
A congressional aide inspects the official Electoral College vote tally in the House Chamber on Jan. 7.
Trump had pressured lawmakers to object to the results in what is normally a routine process, and urged Vice President Mike Pence to take the extraordinary step of rejecting states outright. Instead, Pence presided over the counting of electoral votes, which resumed after order was restored to the Capitol and ended early Thursday. A group of Republicans had prepared objections, perhaps to half a dozen states, but the movement largely fizzled. Trump’s attempt to undo the results of the Nov. 3 election began almost immediately after the votes had been cast. He and his allies fired barrages of fraud allegations, all of them unproven, and filed lawsuits in several battleground states that Biden had wrested from Trump. State and federal courts rejected their claims. In the Scavino tweets Trump added, “I have always said we would continue our fight to ensure that only legal votes were counted. While this represents the end of the greatest first term in presidential history, it’s only the beginning of our fight to Make America Great Again!” (Updates with details, in penultimate paragraph.) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 3 It was concede, forceful eviction by Secret Service 21Jan, or a cabinet vote to remove him today. FINALLY! Well, this report fails to deal with the fact that the allegations of fraud are untested because no court would consider the merits of the bulk of them. Whatever one thinks of President Trump, there are a couple of important facts – more than 70 million Americans voted for him, as did a like number for Biden, and the difference between the two was wafer thin in those 6 key states. If the allegations and apparently substantial evidence of fraud are true (and no court has found that they are not) then the outgoing President and his supporters have a lot to be angry about. Of course, if the evidence does not hold water, then they should get behind the new President. What is deeply unfortunate is that the courts refused to do their job. If a court had assessed the evidence (say, for example, the Georgia incident where the room was cleared for a “burst water main” (that wasn’t) and there is video of suitcases of votes being produced from hiding places and counted irregularly) and found that it was not credible evidence, or had been fabricated – or SOME reasoned finding – then there would be a lot more Americans happy to throw their support behind the new presidency. It is the brushing aside of the evidence and strident repetition that untested evidence is “false” that is probably deepening the divide. Right now, no-one knows what the truth is. It is going to be an interesting year. Ron Ron you have expressed well my concerns. This whole saga has exposed America as a corrupt nation. But then who is not corrupt? Extremely disappointing.