Courgette fritters made without eggs. (Photo: Tony Jackman) Raw courgettes are very watery so the liquid needs to be removed before making these fritters if you don’t want them to be a soggy disappointment. You can make these with egg if you prefer; just add 1 beaten egg when you mix the other ingredients. But they turned out great without eggs. Ingredients 3 or 4 small courgettes, grated 2 spring onions, chopped 4 mint sprigs Handful parsley, finely chopped Zest of 1 lemon, finely grated 2 garlic cloves, chopped 1 red chilli 1 Tbsp flour 1 round of feta, crumbled Olive oil for frying Salt and pepper Method Top and tail the courgettes, wash and dry them, and grate them. Put them in a colander and salt well. Leave for 30 minutes, then rinse well under cold water, drain and squeeze out as much water as you can. Pat dry with kitchen paper to remove remaining water. In a bowl, mix together the grated courgettes, spring onions, flour, garlic, mint, parsley, lemon zest, chilli and feta, and season with salt and pepper. Form into clumps with your hands, then roll in seasoned flour to coat all over. Press them flat with your palm. Fry in olive oil until golden on both sides. Serve with minted yoghurt (plain yoghurt mixed with a little chopped mint, a dash of apple cider or white wine vinegar, and salt and pepper). DM/TGIFood Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Send your recipes to tony@dailymaverick.co.za with a hi-resolution horizontal (landscape) photo. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet