Jan 5, 2021, 7:25 PM – Updated on Jan 5, 2021, 9:23 PM Prime Minister Boris Johnson unveiled the statistics as he vowed to speed up the government’s vaccination program, in order eventually to lift the latest lockdown. He said 23% of all over-80s in England have now been given a dose of a Covid-19 vaccine, meaning some of those at the greatest risk are starting to get the protection they need. Johnson underlined his promise to vaccinate almost 14 million people at the highest risk and carers by mid-February. He said 1.3 million people across the U.K. had already received the first of two shots. “You all want to be sure that we in government are now using every second of this lockdown to put that invisible shield around the elderly and the vulnerable in the form of vaccination, and so to begin to bring this crisis to an end,” Johnson said at a press conference in London. “Yes it is a huge effort. It’s the biggest vaccination program in the history of this country.” The prime minister spoke a day after he put the country into its third national lockdown since the pandemic began. The rest of Europe is also buckling under the strain of a resurgent pandemic, with Germany fighting high infection rates and encountering difficulties rolling out vaccines. The new national restrictions in the U.K. threaten to push the economy into a double dip recession, prompting Johnson’s government to announce another package of emergency support for businesses, worth more than 4.6 billion pounds ($6.2 billion). Johnson defended his decision to order the country to stay at home again, and pointed to latest infection figures showing record levels of coronavirus in the population. “The number of patients in hospitals in England is now 40% higher than at the first peak in April,” he said. “When everybody looks at the position people understand overwhelmingly that we have no choice.” The figure of one in 50 people infected is an estimate based on a mass testing survey that aims to find people who have infections but no symptoms. It is significantly higher than the infection rate implied by the national totals from all positive test results, which mostly rely on people to seek tests when they show symptoms. British officials are in talks over what more is needed to protect the U.K. from the pandemic, including potentially new restrictions at ports and airports on non-essential travel. At the press conference, Johnson said a new testing regime will be introduced. “We will be bringing in measures to ensure that we test people coming into this country and prevent the virus from being readmitted,” he said. The lockdown followed warnings from government medical advisers that the National Health Service could be overwhelmed within the next three weeks unless urgent action was taken. At Tuesday’s press briefing, Chris Whitty, the government’s chief medical officer for England, said the “hope” is the new lockdown will be enough to bring the pandemic under control. “If people stick to those rules really strongly and at the same time, the NHS is vaccinating as fast as it can, then our hope is the lockdown will be enough. But we’ve all got to do that.” –With assistance from Joe Mayes, Stuart Biggs, Emily Ashton and David Goodman. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet