Nassimer Rothacker/The Reading List If the way we eat globally continues, the world is at risk of failing to meet the UN Sustainable Development Goals and the Paris Agreement. From extreme weather patterns to raging wildfires, it’s little wonder that more of us than ever are worried about the environmental impact of our food decisions. The easy, family-friendly recipes in Eat to Save the Planet follow recommendations from the EAT-Lancet Commission’s Planetary Health Diet, written by an international group of scientists. This flexitarian reference diet is so simple, easily accessible and tempting that you will hardly believe you’re helping to save the planet as you eat. The mainstays of the Planetary Health Diet are plant-based foods, but while these ingredients are central to its recommendations, the diet doesn’t go as far as being vegetarian or vegan. Recipes in the book include modest quantities of seafood and poultry, with a small amount of red meat being optional – as in this recipe – making this new approach to eating achievable and realistic for everyone. *** Healthy Planet Burgers Serves 4
Ready in 25 minutes
Flexitarian For the burgers To serve These burgers go down the half-beef, half-lentil route, and they are every bit as satisfying as a pure beef burger. Extras of fried onions, grated cheese, sliced lettuce, or salsa and guacamole for a fiesta, are also good. Personally, I like to eat these sandwiched between crisp lettuce leaves rather than a bun, but over to you. Mustard mayo Blend all the ingredients in a small bowl, cover and chill until required. This will keep well for several days. *** Variation: Vegan Burgers Serves 4
Ready in 35–40 minutes
Vegan These are at their finest sandwiched between a couple of crisp lettuce leaves with some sliced tomato, and soft herbs, such as parsley, coriander and mint leaves, that will add a lively note. Eat to Save the Planet: 85 Recipes and Ideas for Eco-Friendly Cooking and Eating is published by Pan Macmillan (R360). Visit The Reading List for South African book news – including recipes! – daily. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet