Crunchy red cabbage salad with an Asian dressing, finished with sultanas, toasted peanuts and sesame seeds. (Photo: Tony Jackman) Ingredients 2 cups finely shredded red cabbage 100 g sultanas 2 spring onions, sliced on the diagonal 1 small green pepper, seeds removed, sliced into slivers 3 cm peeled fresh ginger, minced 5 Tbsp apple cider vinegar 2 tsp brown sugar 1 Tbsp white sesame seeds ¼ cup raw peanuts, toasted and lightly salted Dressing: 1 Tbsp soy sauce 1 tsp sesame oil 2 tsp honey 2 Tbsp brown rice vinegar 2 cm piece of fresh ginger, minced Method Steep sultanas in 2 Tbsp vinegar and the sugar for an hour or more before making the salad. Don’t discard the marinating liquor. Shred cabbage very finely. Bring water to a boil, then add 3 Tbsp of the apple cider vinegar and plunge the cabbage in. The vinegar helps to hold the red colour. Remove to a colander after 2 minutes, and run iced water through, then drain. Slice the spring onions and green pepper. Mince the ginger. Mix the dressing ingredients in a bowl large enough to hold the cabbage. Drain the liquor from the sultanas into this. Add most of the spring onions, green pepper and sultanas to the cabbage. Shake a palmful of sesame seeds all over and toss again. Toss together and turn out into a serving bowl. Toast raw peanuts in a dry pan and salt lightly. Scatter the remaining green pepper, spring onion and sultanas over the top. Scatter the peanuts over and some more sesame seeds. DM/TGIFood Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Send your recipes to tony@dailymaverick.co.za with a hi-resolution horizontal (landscape) photo. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet