By Morten Buttler
Feb 26, 2021, 11:30 AM – Updated on Feb 26, 2021, 12:07 PM
Word Count: 370 Prime Minister Mette Frederiksen has pledged to reduce Denmark’s emissions by 70% before 2030 compared with the 1990 level, going beyond the 55% target agreed to by member states in the European Union. Despite new initiatives and landmark decisions, Denmark is still falling short of its objective and the government has so far failed to illustrate how the 2030 target can be achieved, the climate council said. “There is at this time meaningful uncertainty and a lack of clarity about the road the government wants Denmark to follow toward the 70% in 2030,” the council said in its report. “Therefore it is important that the government swiftly establish more concrete plans and processes for how the remaining reduction need is realized.” Denmark made several decisions in 2020, including an agreement to cease oil exploration in the North Sea by 2050. Without new measures before 2030, Denmark is projected to reduce emissions by 54%, up from 45% at this time last year. Read more: EU’s ‘Climate Leader’ Explains Why 2020 Has Left Him Optimistic Read more: Denmark Secures Backing for $34 Billion Clean Energy Island The council urged the government to present detailed plans for cutting emissions in all industrial sectors and to launch a national strategy for carbon capture and storage. Other recommendations include a high and uniform emissions tax and a sub-target for reductions by 2025. In October, the government said reaching the 2030 target could cost as much as 24 billion kroner ($3.9 billion), about 1% of the country’s gross domestic product in 2030, according to the latest forecasts. The government is already working on implementing some of the council’s recommendations, including a national strategy for carbon capture and storage, Climate and Energy Minister Dan Jorgensen said. “In a year-and-a-half we have solved about a third of the task, which we have 10 years to solve,” Jorgensen said in an emailed statement. “That is a big step in the right direction but we are still far from our goal.” Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet