Weddings aren’t the only time a couple can look forward to enjoying cake. Valentine’s Day is just as good a day as any to indulge in a slice or two of everyone’s favourite dessert. Instead of going with a conventional cake, get something that’s as unique as the bond you share with your significant other. A customised cake dripping with toppings is the only way to go if you’re serious about showering your better half with the love they deserve. Take things a step further by adding a special image and a customised message brimming with sweet nothings. Teenage sweethearts are all too familiar with the sweet joy of giving and receiving a yummilicious ice cream stick from the one they hold dearest to their heart. Sharing an ice cream stick with your soulmate is the stuff of classic rom-coms and unforgettable first dates. There’s no reason to relegate that heart-warming magic to your teenage years. Order the Limited Edition Valentine’s Day NiceCream Stix to share with the keeper of your heart. If you’re looking for a bit more variety, a NiceCream Stix bundle is the only ice cream you need to melt your partner’s heart. What’s the one gift you can almost always count on getting on Valentine’s Day? We’ll save you the trouble of guessing and just come out with it: Breakfast in bed. But there is an unsavoury reality to breakfast in bed: Toast crumbs in your bedding and jam stains on your pillowcases. There’s also the trouble of sneaking out of bed and preparing breakfast without waking up your partner. It’s best to order something and enjoy it together at the breakfast table. In terms of sweet treats that are meant to be enjoyed first thing in the morning, you can’t go wrong with a plate of our oh-so-sweet waffles. It’s never a bad time for waffles, but having them first thing in the morning on Valentine’s Day is a sweet romantic gesture worth experiencing. On any other day, you’d be forgiven for squirting some chocolate sauce on a few scoops of ice cream and calling it a sundae. But Valentine’s Day is no ordinary day. On the 14th of February, only a supercilious Sunnydae will do. That means unrestrained decadence: Generous servings of NiceCream slathered in sweet sauce and topped with a wafer, crushed chocolate, and cream. Gifting your sweet someone with chocolates on Valentine’s Day is a stereotype that’s so ingrained in our culture that’s it’s become a mandate. But just because everyone else is doing it, doesn’t mean you have to follow suit. There are plenty of tastier ways to celebrate your undying love for your special someone. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet