1. A TFSA is not the only tax-efficient savings option A lot of the media coverage on TFSAs appears to take people’s eyes off the fact that the first savings priority for any investor remains their contribution to some type of registered retirement fund (via their employer or a retirement annuity). In general, investors should first provide for an adequate contribution to their retirement fund before taking out a TFSA. Over the course of 2020, amid the impact of COVID-19 on the SA economy and markets, South African retirement funds were on the receiving end of some bad publicity. Specifically, the investment restrictions imposed on South African retirement funds via Regulation 28 attracted significant media coverage. The regulation limits equity exposure to 75% of a portfolio; there is a maximum limit of 30% in offshore assets and an additional 10% for the rest of Africa. Many market commentators questioned whether retirement funds in South Africa still represent a good investment. Whilst this is an important debate for South African investors, it is a debate for a different article. Suffice to say that the tax benefits available to South African retirement fund investors remain significant. Especially when compounded over a period of twenty years or more, these benefits dwarf those of a TFSA. We remain convinced that retirement funds present good value to investors given the tax benefits. Secondly, investors should remember to use their annual tax-free interest exemption (currently R23 800 per year for individuals under age 65). At current money market rates of between 4% and 5%, an investor in SA can keep up to R500 000 in a fixed income fund before paying any tax on the interest. Ideally, this allowance should be used to set up an investor’s emergency cash pool. 2. The tax benefits of TFSAs compound exponentially over time When TFSAs were originally launched, many investors and advisors underestimated the extent to which the tax benefits on TFSAs would compound over time. This happened because, unlike a retirement fund, the TFSA contribution is not tax-deductible upfront. This makes it difficult to calculate the rand value of the tax benefits. These points are best illustrated by an example. In Figure 1 we project a TFSA’s fund values over a twenty-year period based on the following assumptions:  Figure 1: TFSA value projection split between contributions and investment return 3. Lifetime TFSA contribution limits are precious – don’t waste them Current TFSA product rules, as set out by National Treasury, do not allow an investor to recover any part of their lifetime TFSA contribution limit should they need to dip into the TFSA assets to fund an emergency expense. Every time an investor uses part of their TFSA contribution allowance, that allowance is gone forever. 4. The investment portfolio should be consistent with the investment horizon There are two key considerations when constructing an investment portfolio for a TFSA investment: More conservative, fixed income-orientated portfolios merely reduce the likely long-term investment returns without really adding anything to the portfolio – since long-term investors should not be concerned about volatility. Secondly, even though fixed-income investments seem attractive because they appear to maximise the tax benefit for the investor in the short term, they disappoint in the long term because of their significantly lower total returns. It seems that a good starting point for most TFSA investors is to have a look at unit trust funds from the “ASISA South African Multi-Asset: High Equity” category, or something similar. These funds have historically produced attractive long-term risk-return trade-offs. Given that TFSA investment portfolios are not restricted by regulation and are long-term in nature, investors with time horizons exceeding ten years should even consider more aggressive investment portfolios. The most popular investment portfolio for the Ninety One TFSA has been the Ninety One Global Franchise Feeder Fund, an offshore equity fund, which makes up 20% of total assets in the Ninety One TFSA product. 5. Keep it simple Most large South African financial services companies have launched their own TFSA products, offering a range of options. Setting up a TFSA might sound like a daunting task. But it should not be – the best strategy really is to keep it simple. There are several benefits to picking an investment platform, such as the Ninety One Investment Platform, for TFSAs: Conclusion TFSAs are a great initiative from government to encourage savings in South Africa and are important financial planning tools for financial advisors. However, it is important to set them up correctly as long-term investments in order to maximise a client’s lifetime tax benefit from the product.  For more information, visit www.ninetyone.com/tfsa. DM/BM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet