People allegedly buying and selling cigarettes illegally during lockdown. (Photo: Gallo Images / Papi Morake) First published in the Daily Maverick 168 weekly newspaper. South Africa is experiencing an exacerbation of illicit trade at a time when the economy is at its weakest. “Unemployment is at 31%, poverty levels are more than 50%, youth unemployment is higher than 50% and our inequality levels in society are the most unequal in the world. When you add illicit trade to that picture, the situation is increasingly dire,” said Busi Mavuso, chief executive of Business Leadership SA. She was speaking at a webinar organised by Business Leadership SA on illicit trade. Mavuso said the ban on tobacco alone translated to a loss of R35-million a day for the fiscus. “Our national budget deficit is more than R350-billion. With businesses closing down and thousands of job losses, South Africans are looking at government to assist with stimulus packages to help businesses rebuild and survive. In that environment, the loss of fiscal revenue and tax revenue could not have come at a worse time.” Mavuso called on business, society and the government to support the South African Revenue Services and tax commissioner Edward Kieswetter in his efforts to resuscitate the illicit trade unit, which was shut down during the Zuma State Capture years.  Evidence of widespread illicit trade Yusuf Abramjee, the founder of Tax Justice SA, said the ban on cigarettes opened the door for criminals to continue their illegal activity on a larger scale; as a result illicit trade was now out of control. Tax Justice SA commissioned a research project in Cape Town, Pretoria, Johannesburg and Durban to investigate how widespread it was. “We released the findings of our survey two weeks ago. Out of 40 supermarkets, spaza shops and corner cafés that we visited, we found that 39 were selling a pack of 20 cigarettes for under R20.01.” Cigarettes are taxed at almost R20 a packet, which means a pack of cigarettes priced as low as R20.02 is likely part of the illicit trade industry with no taxes being paid. The government has indicated that its target is to keep excise duties or “sin taxes” on cigarettes at 40% of the overall cost price. Once VAT is added to this, the net effect is that more than 50% of the marked price on a legitimate pack of cigarettes goes to tax. Zacharia Motsumi, the executive director of Tobacco Producers Development and the spokesperson for the South Africa Tobacco Transformation Alliance, suggested that the government introduce a minimum price list (MPL) to make it easier for law enforcement to identify illicit tobacco traders. “At this stage, the tobacco industry employs around 8,000 workers where we used to employ 14,000 to 15,000 workers with 30,000 dependants. Prior to the lockdown, illicit trading in the tobacco industry stood at around 25% to 28%, but [when] the bans were introduced, illicit trading has moved to almost 100%,” he said. Motsumi said the minimum price for a pack of 20 cigarettes should be R25 to R28. In 2013, South Africa was one of 54 countries to sign the World Health Organisation protocol to eliminate illicit trading in tobacco, but Motsumi said no action had been taken since then. The WHO protocol outlines the following steps: According to the WHO protocol, countries may require the tobacco industry to bear any costs associated with a track-andtrace system. Lockdown hangover Kurt Moore, CEO of the South African Liquor Brand Association (Salba), said about 15% of market share was accounted for by illicit trade or organised crime, which seemed to have flourished during lockdown. Moore said the problem was widespread and all stakeholders, including the police, alcohol manufacturers, retailers, and consumers, must work together to combat it. Before the lockdown, the South African alcohol sector lost an estimated R12.9-billion a year to illicit trade. Current losses have not been quantified, but this figure is expected to have risen considerably. On average, regulated alcohol production contributes R72-billion to the South African economy through taxation, VAT and excise. In 2019, the alcohol sector accounted for 3.4% (R173-billion) of South Africa’s nominal GDP. Yet the government is estimated to lose around R6.4-billion per year as a result of illegal alcohol trading. Moore said the industry had identified three ways in which illegal alcohol was entering the market: How to spot fake booze It can be easy to identify fake or illegal alcohol if you know what to look for: In 2020, Salba set up a toll-free hotline – 0800 014 856 – to report any suspected illegal alcohol trading. Out of 40 supermarkets, spaza shops and corner cafés that we visited, we found that 39 were selling a pack of 20 cigarettes for under R20.01. DM168 This story first appeared in our weekly Daily Maverick 168 newspaper which is available for free to Pick n Pay Smart Shoppers at these Pick n Pay stores.  Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet