Stuffed peppers, Mexican style. (Photo: Tony Jackman) Ingredients 5 or 6 red, green and yellow bell peppers/ capsicum 1 medium onion, chopped 1 garlic clove, chopped finely 2 Tbsp olive oil 1 habanero chilli (or jalapeño if you prefer), chopped finely 1 quantity salsa roja (red salsa) as per the linked recipe/ or 1 commercial jar of Mexican red salsa 300 g ground beef 1 ½ tsp ground cumin 1 tsp ground coriander (seeds) 1 Tbsp lemon juice 1 x 400 g can red kidney beans, drained A handful rice Salt and pepper to taste Grated Cheddar cheese, about 1 cup Method Cut the “lids” off the peppers and discard. Trim away the veins and remove seeds. Place peppers in a microwavable container with ¼ cup water at the bottom. Cover with cling film and microwave for 4 to 5 minutes on high. Remove and set aside. Sauté onion and garlic in a little olive oil until softened. Add ground beef and work it with a wooden spoon to ensure it does not clump. Cook for 3 minutes, then add the chilli, salsa, cumin, coriander and lemon juice and cook, stirring, for a few minutes. Add a handful of washed rice, the kidney beans, and season to taste with salt and pepper. Cook on a low simmer for about 20 minutes, until the rice has cooked through and absorbed most of the liquid. Spoon into the par cooked peppers and bake in a 200℃ oven for 20 minutes. Remove from the oven, top with grated Cheddar cheese and pop them back in the oven for three minutes. Sprinkle with chopped coriander (cilantro) leaves before serving. DM/TGIFood Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Send your recipes to tony@dailymaverick.co.za with a hi-resolution horizontal (landscape) photo. To enquire about Tony Jackman’s book, foodSTUFF (Human & Rousseau) please email him at tony@dailymaverick.co.za Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet