Former president Jacob Zuma. (Photo: Gallo Images / Thuli Dlamini) First published in the Daily Maverick 168 weekly newspaper. This year marks 25 years since the historical signing into law of the South African Constitution – thus cementing the foundation of our democratic project. By the time that the founding president of a democratic South Africa, Nelson Mandela, signed it into law on 10 December 1996 at Sharpeville, the final text had gone through a rigorous process, contestation, debates and initial rejection by the Constitutional Court. Although the Constitutional Assembly, the precursor to our current Parliament, submitted their final draft of the Constitution to the court in May of that year, it was not until a day before its signing into law that the Constitutional Court finally certified it. For the new court, it was important that the new Constitution was in line with the prescripts of the 34 Constitutional Principles that had been agreed by the multiparty forum at the pre-1994 negotiations about a democratic South Africa. That is why the court sent the document back to Parliament. As it is often repeated, ours was a hardwon democracy – following years of racism, violent subjugation and economic exclusion of black people. Many paid with their lives and did not live to see a democratic South Africa. It is important that we remember this. This reminder becomes ever so necessary today as our Constitution is under attack. Leading the charge in the desecration of our Constitution is former president Jacob Zuma, despite having sworn under oath twice to “obey, observe, uphold and maintain the Constitution and all other Law of the Republic”. So brazen is Zuma’s disdain for our Constitution that he issued a public statement indicating that he would defy the Constitutional Court order compelling him to give evidence before the Commission of Inquiry into State Capture, chaired by Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo. And he did. But Zuma is not the only one who has no regard for our Constitution. He finds himself in the good company of ANC Secretary-General Ace Magashule, who openly declared during an interview I had with him last month that “the Constitution is not sacrosanct”. At that point one had hoped that within the ANC someone senior enough would rise to the defence of this valuable document. But it was not to be. Instead, I had the misfortune of interviewing ANC Women’s League President Bathabile Dlamini in Bloemfontein on the sidelines of Magashule’s court appearance for corruption. Without any sense of irony, Dlamini defended Zuma’s delinquency, arguing that the former president was justified in defying the Constitutional Court as he felt that he was not being fairly treated. She further asserted that “the best judiciary is a judiciary that listens to the people”. Frankly, she expects the judges of our country to merely cast out the Constitution and act on the whimsical and ever-changing views of the public. What this tells us is that these are not just views from left-field; rather, they are widely held within the ANC’s leadership at the highest level. Besides Justice Minister Ronald Lamola (during his speech in Parliament last week), and President Cyril Ramaphosa in his weekly newsletter this week, no prominent voice from the ANC and government has come out in defence of our Constitution. Have we forgotten so quickly the pain and sacrifice we endured to get us to this point? Does it not matter any more? Yes, it was important for Ramaphosa to come out batting for our judiciary: “We interfere with the functioning of our courts and weaken the rule of law when we attack the judiciary. Our failure to implement our courts’ injunctions weakens our constitutional democracy,” said Ramaphosa. This was a clear reference to Zuma’s defiance of the courts. The President’s voice matters, but his lone voice is not enough. The danger with allowing the current situation is that we risk sinking further into a dark abyss from which we may not recover. We are already a country of violent protests and lawlessness. If the courts and the Constitution are not respected, we may as well kiss our democracy goodbye. That is why the courts have to continue to mete out justice without fear or favour. What also needs to be challenged are the deliberate lies spread on social media platforms and in public statements, intended to sully the image of the judiciary by suggesting judges are on the payroll of politicians without providing proof. One would have expected Chief Justice Mogoeng Mogoeng to have spoken out by now. Strangely, he has kept quiet. These are dangerous views, which, if left unchallenged, risk becoming the truth. This cannot be allowed. DM168 Sibusiso Ngalwa is the Newzroom Afrika politics editor and Sanef chair. This story first appeared in our weekly Daily Maverick 168 newspaper which is available for free to Pick n Pay Smart Shoppers at these Pick n Pay stores.  Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 4 I am deeply concerned about the credibility of the judiciary. This is partly spelled out by Mr. Ngalsa referring the the quiet voice of the Chief Justice, but nothing better illustrates this concern better that the decision of Judge Hlope to appoint himself to handle the Bongo bribery case, after 4 years of not handling any cases himself. Then deciding to acquit Bongo without even listening to his evidence. Why have the powers in law not remove Hlope years ago, and why are the recent serious allegations against him still hanging in the air? My corncern stretch much further. How fair will the judges be in handling both Zuma and Magashule’s court cases. Can we trust them, or have they also already being captured by powerful politicians SA, you really do need to talk about Hlophe and his suitability to be part of the judiciary. What we have in this putrid and thoroughly obnoxious ruling party are highly spineless, completely wayward and corrupt to the core so-called leaders. They are totally bereft of morals, integrity and ethics – just rapacious and evil bottom- feeders, whose sole purpose in life is to steal as much as they can. As if this stinking party could sink in lower in depravity, they haven’t come out, guns blazing to defend the Constitution. Totally disgusted, but not surprised. When are “our leaders” do what they should do and defend the constitution and act against all who do not abide by its rules and findings