Pork belly and its crackling. (Photo: Louis Pieterse) Oil or butter? Or both – or neither? Salt, or not? How about liquids – how do you get the meat of a pork joint succulent and cooked through yet also end up with perfectly crisp rind, that wondrous thing that every pork lover craves: the perfect pork crackling? Caroline Conran, and it’s wise to consult very English cooks on this subject, urges us, when roasting a loin of pork, to rub the crackling with a little butter (“don’t sprinkle it with salt, as this will toughen the crackling”), then roast at 220℃ for 10 to 15 minutes, then reduce to 190℃ for 20 minutes per 500℃ plus another 20 minutes. “Don’t,” she instructs, “baste the crackling, just let it cook and it will be crisp and delicious.” Marco Pierre White, aka my food hero, massages sunflower oil into the rind for what he calls a method that is “no fuss, straightforward, guaranteed every time” adding, “without the oil the crackling is never as golden, never as crispy”. But we’ve all done that and sometimes been successful, at other times failed. Then he salts it (“not too much salt”) and pours a little water into the bottom of the roasting tray, places the belly on a rack above it, and roasts for 1½ to 2 hours on the bottom shelf (we’ll come back to that) at 160℃. “Your crackling should be golden brown, perfect.” Delia Smith, for a pork loin, scores, salts, and roasts at 240℃ for 25 minutes, then turns the heat down to 190℃ and cooks for 35 minutes “to the pound” (about 450 g), minus the original 25 minutes of cooking time. Basically, nobody here is on the same page, right? So best we try to work it out for ourselves. Felicity Cloake, in The Guardian, concurs: “Sadly, this (scoring) is where the happy crackling consensus breaks down. Post-scoring, everyone goes their own separate ways in search of the porcine holy grail.” She found herself “unable to find even two recipes which agreed exactly on what to do and when”. So, let’s work it out for ourselves and, if we can finally pull it off, perhaps have that lot coming to us to see how it’s done. Maybe. The mission is twofold: the crackling must be perfectly crisp, crunchy, not too hard to the bite, but not at all chewy. And, the meat must be cooked but succulent, not at all dry. Easy, right? So here’s the state of play: I took a masterclass in perfect belly crackling with my science-minded son-in-law, Neal Derman, over Christmas and, though he got his right, I overcooked the meat when I tried it at home. So I’ve added a new step (or two) below. The key? Our method starts the evening before it’s to be cooked. Here’s how I cooked a pork belly this week. At the end, I’ll divulge the outcome (I don’t know yet, it’s still in the oven.) The verdict? The crackling was super crunchy, with a real snap to it, and the meat succulent. Result. Pretty chuffed, actually. But wait, there’s more… Since this story was published in our DM168 print newspaper and following our first story on the topic, we have received tips from crackling-loving readers. Here’s what they tell us: Contact Tony Jackman at tony@dailymaverick.co.za if you have your own tips for attaining perfect pork crackling. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet