 Dark comedy. Set in the world of ’80s Wall Street, stock broker Maurice Monroe and his office besties live larger than you’d believe. Copious quantities of cocaine are shovelled up noses to keep the brains ticking over, there’s backstabbing galore, and the fashion is eye-wateringly bright. Don Cheadle and Regina Hall are genius. Watch now.   Sport biography. 6 episodes. 1 World Cup trophy. Watch as the Springboks explore their journey from being written off the year before the 2019 Rugby World Cup after devastating losses, through to their victory to become World Champions. Insightful, deep, moving and not just for rugby fans. Watch now.   Biographical drama. The lead-up to the 2016 US presidential election is told from the viewpoint of FBI Director James Comey, who was manipulated and used by candidate Trump to get him into the White House. Jeff Daniels gives the story a sense of honesty, while Brendan Gleeson is so good as Donald Trump that you’d swear they had the real deal on the show. Watch now. Also watch biographical political drama The Loudest Voice featuring an unrecognisable Russell Crowe in the lead.   Doccie. Samuel L Jackson tackles the story of the slave trade from an entirely new perspective – from the people who died. He investigates the industry, from the shores of Africa, across the oceans, to the United States… and tragically, the ocean floor, where the remains of sunken slave ships are the last resting place of thousands. Watch now. Also watch historical drama series The Good Lord Bird and biographical movie Harriet.   Comedy. A family who’ve made their fortune with their Christian TV channel and televangelism implode when their businessman patriarch, the brains behind the organisation, dies in a plane crash that might not’ve been an accident. Watch now. Also watch trashy comedy Florida Girls. Also watch genius televangelism spoof dark comedy The Righteous Gemstones that’s dripping in cameos. Season 2 coming soon.   Epic fantasy. Based on the Fire & Ice novels, the fight for the Iron Throne rages across the seven medieval-like kingdoms. You can’t trust anyone. The violence is graphic. The dragons are monstrous. And do not – whatever you do – choose a favourite character. People die… lots of people die in every episode. Watch now. Also watch epic Norse drama Vikings S6 (if you’ve watch S1-5 before) or Britannia S1.   Sci-fi/horror/drama. A young black man sets out across 1950s America to find his missing father, only to discover that otherworldly creatures aren’t the worst enemy he’s going to face in life. Watch now. Also watch The Plot Against America.   Crime drama. Honest nightclub-owning businessman by day, druglord by night, Omari Hardwick’s character James St Patrick wants to go legit… but that’s easier said than done. Keep an eye out for rappers like Method Man and series executive producer 50 Cent. Watch now. Also watch the sequel series Power Book II: Ghost.   Sci-fi. Filmed in Cape Town (not that you’d know – it’s set in a desolate alien world), two androids are programmed to raise children after the human world is destroyed by war. Watch now. Also watch War Of The Worlds and Philip Pullman’s His Dark Materials.   Drama. Brian Cox is at his disparaging best as Logan Roy, a media magnate with a penchant for being mean to his brood. After suffering a debilitating stroke, Logan realises that none of his kids are worth of succeeding him as CEO – and he’s not afraid to tell them. Watch now. Also watch local M-Net soapie Legacy and Billions, starring Damian Lewis and Paul Giamatti.   Reality. They’re flashy and love splashing the cash. Get a peek at what it’s like when you wallet is as deep as the ocean, your egos are out of control and your catfights make a litter of crazy kittens look like, well, kittens. Watch now. Also watch family fly-on-the-wall reality show The Ranakas S1-4 and, of course, The Real Housewives of Johannesburg.  Cop comedy. Nathan Fillion is genius as Officer Nolan, the oldest-ever rookie in LAPD history. His mid-life crisis sees him search for the meaning to life, one arrest at a time. Watch now. Also watch buddy cop comedy Brooklyn Nine-Nine or classic drama series The Wire.   Crime thriller. A therapist’s life falls apart when her husband is implicated in the murder of a woman who claims that he was unfaithful. Everything she knew soon falls apart like a nightmare. Nicole Kidman and Hugh Grant have effortless chemistry, but you will be unsettled. Watch now. Also watch British crime drama The Bay and Stephen King murder mystery The Outsider.   Comedy. Tali Shapiro is your typical Sandton princess – except now she’s moved to Cape Town, and she’s engaged! There’s nothing like a wedding to bring out the crazy, and Tali will stop at literally nothing to get the wedding of her dreams. From 26 February, stream the sequel – Tali’s pregnant and you know that’s not going to go well … Starring Julia Anastasopoulos and Anton Taylor. Watch now »   Sport Biography. Eldrick Tont Woods is arguably the world’s greatest-ever golfer, but Tiger’s rise to fame has been marred with controversy in his personal life. Two intimate episodes explore what you think you know about the master of golf greens. Watch now. For more sports doccies, watch HBO’s What’s my Name: Muhammad Ali. DM/ML Get a three-month subscription to any Showmax package for the price of a one-month subscription. That’s a whole 12 weeks of entertainment to take your 2021 to the next level. Packages start at R49 for Showmax Mobile, R99 for Showmax, Showmax Mobile Pro for Showmax Mobile Pro and R449 for Showmax Pro. Deal valid until 31 March 2021. Find out more » Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet