The worst-case scenario, towards which SA seems to be sliding inexorably in the medium term, is that government defaults on its debt, capital flees, the currency collapses, and government has to beg the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for assistance. IMF assistance comes with an austerity program. Beyond that point, if there is no political will to implement austerity, the IMF and other lenders will turn their back on SA. Then the country will move into the category of a “Failed State” with probable skyrocketing inflation and unemployment, shortages of goods and mass emigration of higher-skilled workers. Is that a realistic future? Who knows? But in the euphoria of 1994-1998, we would not have believed that the economy would look like this only 25 years later. The long term is merely the culmination of a series of short-term steps. In 2020, those strides got longer as Covid-19 worsened an already failing economy. In the Medium-term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS) on 28 October, National Treasury forecast the South African economy would contract by 7.8% in 2020 and would grow by 3.3% in 2021. Investec’s chief economist, Annabel Bishop, now sees 2020 GDP at -7.3% and 2021 GDP at +2.9% y/y. Johannes Khosa of Nedbank also sees 2020 growth at -7.3%, but 2021 at +3.4%. Government forecasts its debt will reach 81.8% of GDP in 2020/21 and 95.3% in 2025/26. According to the MTBPS, this should be tackled by a combination of tax hikes and spending cuts, notably on wages. Treasury is targeting to raise an additional R5 billion in taxes this year. These seem to be unrealistic goals. Khosa said tax hikes would be ineffective as tax buoyancy has now sunk below one, in other words, every 1% increase in GDP produces less than a 1% increase in tax revenue. Tax hikes would only further reduce tax buoyancy. In its “South African Outlook 2021”, BNP Paribas SA’s senior economist Jeff Schultz said the biggest obstacles to SA’s recovery this year are a shortage of electricity, which is expected to worsen, and the slow roll-out of the Covid-19 vaccine. He says there is little room for tax increases, but cutting the wage bill will be a difficult test for government. It is obvious that the cabinet remains determined to prop up costly state-owned entities such as SAA, Eskom and the SABC – even though it lacks the funds to do so. Most private-sector economists believe that tax revenue can be increased if government follows policies that stimulate economic growth, for example by cutting the mountain of red tape on every aspect of business, from employment (including visas, quotas and minimum wages) to procurement. National Treasury conceded in the MTBPS that government spending in the last few years has failed to stimulate economic growth, partly because of “regulations that impede innovation and productivity”. “South Africa has reached the point where nominal spending cuts are the only route to fiscal sustainability,” Khosa said. “It will be difficult to effect in the middle of a health crisis, a shrinking economy, calls for continued financial aid from state-owned enterprises and with fierce resistance from public-sector unions. However, failure to reduce spending now will add fuel to the debt service cost burden, trigger further sovereign risk ratings’ downgrades deeper into junk status with negative feedback loops, and force even more disruptive adjustments at some point in the future.” These are depressing words for South Africans who want to protect their current standard of living. The Rand On the rand, Khosa said despite the strengthening in the rand in the last quarter of 2020, it still ended the year 4% weaker against the dollar and 7.9% down against the trade-weighted basket of currencies. “The rand is expected to hold on to most its recent gains in 2021, but the local unit will remain vulnerable to changing global risk sentiment, SA’s poor fiscal position and threat of further ratings downgrades,” he said. Are there options available? OrbVest and other companies have been actively encouraging South Africans to diversify and establish part of their wealth in the first world, in a stable economy, where you can sleep at night knowing that you are earning stable quarterly dividends in USD, protected by the rule of law. OrbVest was fuelled by this need, and Martin Freeman (CEO now based in New York) together with his executive team, have certainly shown the benefits of not only investing in commercial real estate for low-risk wealth preservation, but that medical office blocks in specific states in the USA are a niche that are particularly attractive. The portfolio, now approaching $340 million, which is owned predominantly by South Africans, has generated a steady annual return averaging around 8% over the last 6 years. This is paid out as a dividend each quarter. Not only is this an attractive return for a stable long term real estate backed investment, but the buildings are sold at the end of a 5-year period generating an additional capital gain, which is returned to investors at the end of the period. Of course, we all hope that “things will get better” But the current outlook presents a real risk to those with a long-term savings goal, which might be maintaining your standard of living in retirement or looking after your children. The sensible action, particularly while the rand is temporarily showing some strength against the dollar, is to invest a substantial portion of your wealth in hard currency assets. DM/BM   Brought to you by Justin Clarke, Chief Operating Officer of OrbVest. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet