Carl Niehaus’s ANC membership has temporarily been suspended for the “inflammatory speeches” he made outside former president Jacob Zuma’s house in Nkandla over the weekend, but he’s made it clear that he will appeal this “with immediate effect”. Niehaus could face expulsion following a disciplinary hearing, and insiders said suspended ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule could follow the same path. He was suspended in terms of Rule 25.60 of the party’s constitution, which reads as follows: “If justifiable exceptional circumstances warrant an immediate decision of temporary suspension of a member without eliciting the comment or response of such member as contemplated above, the [national executive committee], the [national working committee], the [provincial executive committee], or the [provincial working committee], as the case may be, may summarily suspend such member.” It is understood that Magashule as well as national executive committee member Tony Yengeni, both of whom went to Nkandla over the weekend to support Zuma, might face similar membership suspensions. In a letter from the ANC secretary-general’s office, where Niehaus is a staffer and where deputy secretary-general Jessie Duarte — who signed the letter dated 7 July 2021 — is currently holding the fort, “Comrade Carl Niehaus, ANC member”, is informed that the speeches he made at Nkandla over the weekend, broadcast live on national television, had brought the ANC into disrepute. “Moreover, you were clad in a T-shirt bearing the ANC logo when you appeared on television,” he is told. Note that he is not addressed as a spokesperson of the Umkhonto we Sizwe Military Veterans at all because, as far as the ANC’s NEC is concerned, that structure has now finally been disbanded. Niehaus’s reaction on Tuesday when this news was made public was that he did not recognise the disbandment and intended to carry on as normal. This was apparently also the last straw that led to Duarte writing this letter of suspension the next day.   Niehaus is told that, ahead of his disciplinary action, his membership would be temporarily suspended because: “The NEC has a reasonable apprehension that you will likely continue with your acts of misconduct and cause further damage to the good name and reputation of the ANC, thereby bringing the organisation into more disrepute. Consequently, in the current volatile political situation in the country, aided and abetted by your incendiary speeches, the NEC has come to the conclusion that exceptional circumstances exist which justify that your temporary suspension come into operation with immediate effect (from  the date of receipt of this letter).” The seriousness of his transgressions means that the ANC will not give Niehaus 48 hours to respond to the allegations that his behaviour at Nkandla constituted misconduct. Niehaus will be able to set aside this temporary suspension only by making an application to the party’s national disciplinary committee of appeal, something which he said on Twitter he intended to do immediately. “I remain a dedicated liberation fighter,” he added, which possibly was also meant to refer to his efforts to help keep Zuma out of jail. Niehaus told supporters brandishing firearms and knobkieries at Nkandla that there would be “dire” consequences should Zuma be imprisoned. The former president was ordered by the Constitutional Court to report to police by Sunday to start a 15-month prison sentence after he was found guilty of contempt of court. Niehaus also said: “The MKMVA will form a human shield to protect president Zuma.” Duarte on Tuesday said using terms such as “human shield” was considered a provocation and reminiscent of the terms that “international terrorists” would use. The NEC at a special meeting on Monday resolved that Niehaus’s contravention of the following rules warrant disciplinary action, and the charges are likely to relate to the following rules in the ANC’s constitution: Niehaus in January was also given a letter of intention to suspend him after he made demeaning comments about Duarte in an interview. The NEC is set to have a scheduled meeting this weekend, after its prior postponement last weekend. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 8 Shame. He is so well suited to be an ANC spokesperson. He is well known for the lies he can fabricate. well said Sir! What a lot of bull from the ANC once again. Temporarily suspension? What the hell is that? He has been defying the ANC since 2017 as part of the RET faction, so this is the best they can do? This is not a trial against Zuma, it is a trial against the ANC. As Duarte said: “Our loved and respected former president”. They still shield him, protect him, like they have done for 22 years. The ANC is a disgrace, just the presidency has changed in the last 3 years. But they also selected Magashule 3 years ago, knowing he is a criminal. They will forever protect, respect, and love, the criminals in the ANC, which now include Mkize. And still, sadly the majority will still vote for them. “God, forgive them, as they do not know any better”. And most of those will die of hunger, water shortage, violence, Aids, Covid, lack of police protection. ANC, may you be damned for the failure of a democratic state, as you are no better than the Nationalists were in an apartheid regime. You too represents a crime, against humanity Seems “unfair” that only the Umlungu got the bullet and not the others threatening to become part of the “human shield”. Then, for Jesse Duarte to attribute the comment to one usually made by “international terrorists” sees the glorious movement sinking even lower. They now have the honour of being able to add “terrorist” to the long list of unsavory names by which they have become known! Interesting that Mr Niehaus appears to have become the “Uncle Tom” within the ANC. Quite ironic actually! What a silly man ( in my opinion!) A complete clown in mine A comment I heard on capetalk today:
The ANC is suspending the ANC with immediate effect for bringing the ANC into disrepute. ai mlungu hlala panzi ngokhu…uquibile