The Robert Koch Institute (RKI) for infectious diseases reported 985 new infections to bring the total to 3.73 million, a rise of 177 cases compared to the daily increase a week ago. The death toll rose by 48 in the past day to a total of 91,110 – down from a daily rise of 56 a week ago. (Graphic of global cases and deaths) https://tmsnrt.rs/34pvUyi It also said that the more infectious Delta variant first identified in India made up 59% of cases at the end of June. The number of cases per 100,000 people recorded in the last seven days rose slightly to 5.1 from 4.9 on Tuesday. The incidence figure had previously been declining since late April. Health Minister Jens Spahn dampened hopes on Wednesday for the lifting of all remaining coronavirus restrictions, saying that would depend on the pace of vaccination. (Graphic on global vaccinations) https://tmsnrt.rs/3tUM8ta While a vaccination rate of 90% will soon be reached among those over age 60, it will take a big advertising drive to reach a rate of 85% among the younger population, Spahn said. “If we manage that as well as possible in July, then we also have a good prospect of an autumn, of a winter with fewer requirements and significantly fewer restrictions,” he told German radio. Foreign Minister Heiko Maas was quoted as saying on Tuesday that Germany should lift all remaining coronavirus curbs as soon as everyone has been offered a vaccine, suggesting that point should be reached next month. Around 57% of people in Germany have received at least one dose and almost 39% are fully vaccinated, according to official data. (Reporting by Emma Thomasson; Editing by Angus MacSwan and Lisa Shumaker) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet