Tony Jackman’s roast duck with cherry sauce and duck fat-roasted potatoes. (Photo: Tony Jackman) There goes the Food Police siren again, do you hear it? Pull over immediately! There has been an infringement! Duck Flesh Must Be Pink! By Order! But it’s just not true. Of course, a duck breast cooked perfectly pink is a joy, but that doesn’t mean it’s the only way to cook duck. Just look at Chinese and other Asian cuisines with their duck cooked well done. Peking Duck, shredded crispy duck in pancakes, Duck Jungle Curry, Thai Red Duck, Vietnamese Orange Duck. In subterranean cellar restaurants in Prague you’ll eat roast duck with dumplings, which tends to be rather plain, in truth, but the point is made. Let’s fly back to the old ways and a true classic. Roast duck with cherry sauce. It’s an old tradition of roasting a duck for a full two hours in a very hot oven so that it cooks to the bone, and that’s what is needed for this dish. The technique has one strict rule: you have to prick the skin many times before putting the bird in the oven, so that the duck fat drips down into a pan below. But this week I did more than just roast a duck and make a quick sauce. Because I’d started with a whole bird, I looked at it and thought, well, I don’t need to roast those wing tips. So I snipped them off (the tips are bigger than chicken wings) and made a quick duck stock with them as the base of my cherry sauce. Then there’s the matter of the duck fat. A duck is loaded. And potatoes just happen to be sublime when roasted in duck fat. So. I peeled and salted potatoes and put them in a deepish oven pan, and put a rack on top for the duck to rest on. Once the bird had been pricked, and heat applied, the fat would begin to ooze out and drip down onto the potatoes. What’s that salivating sound I hear? And so it came to pass… Ingredients 1 duck (obviously) Salt to taste ½ cup Port ⅓ cup cherry liqueur (or use another red fruit liqueur, or muscadel or full cream sherry) Salt and black pepper to taste 100 g pitted morello cherries 2 carrots 1 leek 1 onion 1 celery stick 3 thyme sprigs, A few peppercorns 1 bay leaf 1 heaped Tsp cornflour Water Method For the duck: Snip the wings off and make the stock while the bird is roasting. Preheat the oven to 200℃. Clean the bird and pat it dry. Use a toothpick or bamboo skewer or other suitable sharp object to pierce a great number of holes all over the skin, on all sides, and especially the obvious fleshy pockets of fat. Don’t hold back. I probably stabbed it about 200 times. No damage will be done to the flesh (unless you hack at it with a knife… don’t). The more tiny (and invisible) holes there are, the more the fat will exude. Salt the bird generously all over. It needs no other flavourings as duck meat has a presence all of its own and the complementary flavour will come from the cherry sauce. And you don’t need to brush it with oil or butter or anything else. It has to roast dry; all of that fat will do its own work during the cook. Place peeled potatoes in a deepish roasting pan and salt them lightly. Place a rack above and the duck on top of that. Put it in the hot oven to roast for a good two hours. It makes sense to give the pan a shake after, say, half an hour, to ensure that the potatoes are covered underneath with the hot duck fat that will have dripped down. For the cherry sauce: Make a quick duck stock with the duck wings: boil the wings down with 2 carrots, 1 leek, 1 onion, 1 celery stick, 3 thyme sprigs, a few peppercorns and a bay leaf, in plenty of water, and reduce till there’s about half of the liquid left. Strain and set aside. Add the Port and liqueur to the strained duck stock and reduce on a medium heat by about a third. Season to taste with salt and pepper. Stir in a little cornflour dissolved in water and cook on a low heat until the sauce thickens. Add the morello cherries (which you can buy in glass jars at most supermarkets, usually in the bakery section) right at the end and heat through before serving; they cherries don’t need to be cooked as such as they’d be likely to disintegrate. Say cheers to the Food Police while you tuck in. DM/TGIFood To enquire about Tony Jackman’s book, foodSTUFF (Human & Rousseau) please email him at tony@dailymaverick.co.za Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet