 Manhattan District Attorney Cyrus Vance, a Democrat, has been investigating Trump’s pre-presidency business dealings for more than two years. “We have informed the Trump Organization that our investigation into the organization is no longer purely civil in nature,” spokesman Fabien Levy said in a statement. “We are now actively investigating the Trump Organization in a criminal capacity, along with the Manhattan DA,” he said. The Trump Organization could not immediately be reached for comment. Vance’s office has said in court filings it was investigating “possibly extensive and protracted criminal conduct” at the former president’s Trump Organization, including tax and insurance fraud and falsification of business records. Vance’s probe began after Trump’s former lawyer and fixer Michael Cohen paid hush money to silence two women before the 2016 election about claimed sexual encounters with Trump. That probe has accelerated since Republican Trump lost his bid for a second term to President Joe Biden, a Democrat. New York State Attorney General Letitia James, also a Democrat, is leading a separate criminal probe into whether Trump’s company falsely reported property values to secure loans and obtain economic and tax benefits. (Reporting by Jan Wolfe; additional reporting by Eric Beech; Editing by Tom Hogue and Lincoln Feast.) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 3 #Orangemanmustfall this is what was always suspected. And…what will the likes of McConnell, Graham, and McCarthy et al (who have hitched their wagon on a second Trump presidential run – even though he will be completely senile by then) do when their macho man liar is sitting in jail, just like his pal Epstein had to ? Commit suicide also ?