“The elderly have demonstrated much enthusiasm and came for vaccination in numbers.” — Department Health spokesperson, Sizwe Kupelo. By Thursday 20 May, some provincial vaccine centres reported being overwhelmed by people’s demand for the vaccine with the Eastern Cape having had to receive an additional 9,000 doses to meet demand. Estelle Ellis explains. RFG Holdings’ pies and fruit juice sales show stunted growth as a result of Covid-19 restrictions RFG Holdings’ sales took a knock as a result of the government’s initial Covid-19 ban on selling hot foods in supermarkets as well as the travel ban affecting pie sales. Juice sales were curtailed by the restrictions on entertainment activities and the slow start to the school year, resulting in a 3.4% decline in turnover. Read more here Western Cape health department to have Covid-19 style dashboard for TB The Western Cape health department says that the Covid-19 response has forced it to put the fight against TB on the backburner and will now be launching a Covid-style tuberculosis dashboard in an effort to catch up as part of its ‘multi-sectoral TB emergency response plan’. Find out more here Western Cape urges residents to help others register Sune Payne reports that the Western Cape Government says that they have noted a resurgence of Covid-19 cases, prompting them to urge all residents to encourage their families and neighbours to register for vaccination. Mangaung service delivery protests stall Free State rollout On Monday, 11 May, service delivery protests erupted in the Free State which in turn stalled the administering of vaccinations in the province. “We tried to get a police escort for the vaccine to arrive at Boikhucho old age home in Mangaung, but because of the scarcity of the vaccine and the cost implications we decided not to take that risk,” said provincial Department of Health spokesperson Mondli Mvambi. Read more here. How to book your vaccination appointment on the Electronic Vaccination Data System The Bhekisisa Centre for Health Journalism explains how to go about securing a Covid-19 vaccination appointment, how the system decides who gets the jab first and what to do if you miss your appointment. Day 3 of phase 2 vaccination sees long queues and scheduling delays On 18 May, 39,371 people had been vaccinated as part of the phase 2 rollout. Government had allocated 100 inoculation sites with a promise of more sites to follow in the week from department of health DG, Dr Anban Pillay. Day 3 also saw a host of political, entertainment and legal public figures getting the vaccine and encouraging others to follow suit, wrote Christi Nortier. What is a post-pandemic global economy likely to look like? With China’s retail sales coming in almost 8% lower than anticipated and the US’s employment statistics looking disappointing, economists attempt to chart what a post-pandemic world will look like, holding out little hope for meaningful recovery in the short term and warn of the possibility of higher inflation, read more about it here. A breakdown of provincial plans to vaccinate the elderly With people over 60 now being vaccinated Spotlight looks at how the process will be carried out across South Africa’s nine provinces and 87 vaccination sites with more to be added. There are several ways to register including through the EVDS website, by SMS or WhatsApp and minister of health Zweli Mkhize has said that a walk-in option will soon be made available. Behind the scenes of how South Africa secured 500,000 J&J doses
Professor Glenda Gray discusses how the first 500,000 J&J vaccine doses, which were part of the Sisonke study, were administered in South Africa and were secured after the Astrazeneca vaccine had to be pulled. Gray says that what the Sisonke study taught her was that South African clinicians and scientists were passionate about their work. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet