Following its “Don’t be a Mampara” campaign which went a long way to sustaining the behavioural interventions required to mitigate against the spread of the virus, the “When We Come Together” campaign features South Africans playing their part to respond to the pandemic, while also preparing for the mass vaccine roll-out.  Ms Wendy Tlou, Executive Head: Humanitarian Response and Behaviour Change Pillars at the Solidarity Fund explains that, “The When We Come Together campaign tells the stories of both well-known and ordinary South Africans who have responded creatively to encouraging new behaviours in the fight against the Coronavirus.” “This is aimed at inspiring and empowering South Africans to continue the journey towards overcoming the pandemic. Although vaccines, which are one of the best ways to fight the virus, are being rolled out, the threat of a third wave remains very real.” “South Africans are therefore called on to continue to practice the COVID-19 safety guidelines which include: the proper wearing of masks, covering the nose and mouth even when in the company of friends and family, avoiding large gatherings, ensuring good ventilation, especially when using public transport and maintaining social distance,” continued Ms Tlou. The Solidarity Fund, designed as a rapid response vehicle to mobilise South Africans in the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic, also calls on South Africans to draw strength and inspiration from each other through this new campaign. “This has always been the South African way. We need to remember, now more than ever, that we are a nation of people who overcome, who encourage and uplift each other and who can inspire new ways of being. We will overcome COVID-19 together and will be stronger as a nation,” concluded Ms Tlou. The campaign went live on Wednesday, 12 May 2021, across a range of media platforms including broadcast, digital and activations in rural areas and townships. Alongside the launch of the campaign, the Solidarity Fund will also be introducing a digital toolkit with communication and marketing material. The toolkit, which can be co-branded, will be freely accessible on the Solidarity Fund website, and can be used by business, civil society and government to support COVID-19 behaviour adherence, vaccine education and uptake. Material will be downloadable and will be available in English, Afrikaans, isiZulu, isiXhosa, Setswana and siSwati. The digital toolkit goes live on Friday, 14 May 2021, with creative digital content. Educational content will be added progressively.  For detailed information and reporting about donations received, projects and approvals, as well as the impact the Fund is having, visit www.solidarityfund.co.za DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet