Coach Hugo Henri Broos attends a press conference held at the Fisht Stadium, Sochi, Russia, 24 June 2017. Cameroon will face Germany in the FIFA Confederations Cup 2017 group A soccer match on 25 June 2017 in Sochi. EPA/PETER POWELL Following South Africa’s failure to qualify for 2022’s Africa Cup of Nations (Afcon), Ntseki was relieved of his duties. Now it is up to Broos, the former Cameroon national coach, to try and pick up the pieces. The Belgian faces the unenviable task of trying to lead South Africa to their first Fifa World Cup qualification since 2002. They missed out in 2006, 2014 and 2018. In 2010 they made the cut by virtue of being the hosts. “We needed someone who is ready, who knows the arena. Because we had to look at the short time of going to the qualifiers, and we needed someone who is ready and knows experience [of running a national team],” said South African Football Association CEO Tebogo Motlanthe. Bafana were set to kick off the World Cup qualifiers on 5 June against neighbours Zimbabwe. But reports indicate that the Confederation of African Football is looking to shift the qualifiers to September due to logistical concerns brought on by Covid-19. South Africa’s group also includes Ghana, who edged South Africa, alongside Sudan, for a spot in Cameroon in 2022. Ethiopia are the last opponents. “I will be there [South Africa] next week to have a few meetings and see what we have to do in the next few months,” Broos told the media via Zoom. “We will do everything, everything, to be qualified for the World Cup next year.” Broos is set to arrive in South Africa next week, where he will outline his plans more clearly and announce his technical team, which will include one yet-to-be-confirmed South African. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet