Compilation image: Sahra Heuwel Feature image: MC-WeeklyDigest-28May: Compilation image by Sahra Heuwel. Second week of vaccinations: A day-by-day account This week, South Africa administered 181,118 doses of the double-shot Pfizer vaccine bringing the total to 348,204 by the morning of 28 May. To see what happened on each day this week, read more below: Day Six: More sites added as roll-out enters second week Day Seven: Tito Mboweni vaccinated, Dis-chem opens another five mass vaccination sites Day Eight: Provincial daily tallies published – and hackers meddle with the registration site Day 9: Western Cape allows walk-ins while Mediclinic waits for its first vaccine delivery Read more:  The Sisonke trial rewrote history: Eight lessons for the nationwide vaccine roll-out ‘Dishonest people are spoiling a good system’: How the public tried to hack the EVDS South Africa’s Electronic Vaccination Data System has not failed, but it has been abused by members of the public. People under 60 years old have been misrepresenting themselves as healthcare workers on the system in order to get an appointment and receive a vaccine dose before they are eligible, according to Dr Nicholas Crisp who leads the team in charge of the system. As a result, the healthcare worker section of the portal has been shut down. Read the report by Estelle Ellis here. J&J vaccines still in Gqeberha plant More than 31 million doses of the single-shot Johnson & Johnson Covid-19 vaccine remain at Aspen Pharmacare’s Gqeberha plant. The US Food and Drug Administration is yet to release a safety audit — done at all manufacturers of the vaccine around the world — which is a requirement before these vaccine doses can be released. Read the report by Estelle Ellis here. Storage conditions changed for Pfizer vaccine The South African Health Products Regulatory Authority has followed its international counterparts in approving a change to the storage conditions of Pfizer’s Covid-19 vaccine. The vaccine can now be stored in a fridge for a month. Read more about how this could benefit the country’s rollout here. Read more: Help to make Covid-19 vaccines safe – Report any vaccine-related adverse events no matter how mild Department of Health’s irregular R150m Digital Vibes deal This week, minister of health Zweli Mkhize said the department’s R150-million deal with Digital Vibes was irregular. Scorpio first revealed this in February 2021 and has been digging ever since. Read the full investigation by Pieter-Louis Myburgh here. Read more: Digital Vibes – The real tragedy is they chowed the money that could have been used to save lives Read more: How South Africa dropped the ball on health communication SIU freezes bank accounts and assets of decontamination companies The Special Investigating Unit has frozen the bank accounts and assets of 14 companies for rendering unnecessary decontamination services to the Gauteng Department of Education. This follows an investigation by Maverick Citizen in January 2021. The investigation is still underway, but there was enough evidence of irregularity to warrant the freeze. Read the report by Victoria O’Regan here. International Olympic Committee donates vaccines to SA Olympians South Africa’s Olympians have been receiving their dose of the Johnson & Johnson vaccine since 21 May. The doses were donated by the International Olympic Committee and the vaccination is recommended but voluntary. The vaccine is available to athletes as well as the Team South Africa members going to Japan. Read the report by Yanga Sibembe here. DM/MC. "Information pertaining to Covid-19, vaccines, how to control the spread of the virus and potential treatments is ever-changing. Under the South African Disaster Management Act Regulation 11(5)(c) it is prohibited to publish information through any medium with the intention to deceive people on government measures to address COVID-19. We are therefore disabling the comment section on this article in order to protect both the commenting member and ourselves from potential liability. Should you have additional information that you think we should know, please email letters@dailymaverick.co.za"