By Iain Marlow
May 21, 2021, 11:55 AM – Updated on May 21, 2021, 1:35 PM
Word Count: 413 The Chinese government notified the Australian authorities that Yang would face trial on May 27, Australian Foreign Minister Marise Payne said in a statement Friday. Yang was detained in January 2019 on allegations of espionage, according to the statement, which expressed concern about his treatment. “We have conveyed to Chinese authorities, in clear terms, the concerns we have about Dr Yang’s treatment and the lack of procedural fairness in how his case has been managed,” Payne said. “The Australian Government will continue to advocate strongly for Dr Yang’s rights and interests and to provide consular assistance to Dr Yang and his family. Our thoughts are with them during this extremely difficult period.” After almost two years of detention in China, prosecutors in Beijing indicted Yang last October, moving forward with a case that has contributed to deteriorating ties between Australia and the world’s second-largest economy. Relations between the two countries have been deteriorating for years and have reached new depths since China blocked or tariffed a series of imports from Australia after Canberra sought an investigation into the origins of the coronavirus pandemic. Read more: China Indicts Australian Held for Almost Two Years on Spy Charge Yang was detained in Guangzhou in January 2019 after flying in from the U.S., and his arrest on espionage allegations was formally announced that August. Yang, a Chinese-born Australian national who’s also known as Yang Jun, became well known as a writer and commentator after previously working as a Chinese foreign affairs official in Beijing, according to the Australian newspaper. “The relevant Chinese authorities are handling the case strictly and in accordance with the law, and fully protecting Yang Jun’s lawful rights,” Chinese Foreign Ministry Spokesman Zhao Lijian told a news briefing in October. Yang is not the only foreign citizen detained in China on politically sensitive charges. In February, China formally arrested Cheng Lei, an Australian citizen and former news anchor for Chinese state television, on national security charges after six months in detention. Two Canadians — International Crisis Group analyst and former Canadian diplomat Michael Kovrig and entrepreneur Michael Spavor — were detained in December 2018 and later also accused of espionage. After a long period of detention, both Canadians were tried in March, with observers — including a group of western diplomats — denied entry. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet