Penguin Random House/Composite: The Reading List If you need a reason to celebrate (and getting vaccinated ain’t it) gather your family together this Africa Day, 25 May, and do some mild carousing with these heritage dishes from Liziwe Matloha’s new recipe book, Dinner at Matloha’s. Matloha is a respected chef and recipe developer; she values authenticity and loves finding new ways to showcase ingredients that reflect her culinary heritage and share her passion for food that is easy to prepare and appeals to the whole family. Today, we’re highlighting her recipes for Umleqwa and Umngqusho – roast “road runner” chicken and samp and beans, cooked the Xhosa way – as well as something for more adventurous taste buds: Masonja, or mopane worms, prepared in the Sepedi tradition. *** Umleqwa “Umleqwa” is isiXhosa for “road runner” chicken – a free-range bird that has spent its life foraging in gardens, fields and streets. Home-reared “hardbody” chickens are different to supermarket birds – they are bigger and tougher, with strong bones, so they need a long cooking time, but the end result will be tender meat and a tasty gravy. Why “road runner”? Well, that comes from the action that takes place when you try to catch it! “Leqwa” means to chase, and believe me, these birds know when it is time to run! Serves 8 Ingredients Method Cook’s notes *** Umngqusho Samp and beans is an African staple, with different versions found throughout southern Africa. Both dried samp and dried beans need to be soaked before cooking, so this is not a dish you can hurry. Serves 4–6 Ingredients Method *** Masonja In the wild, mopane worms occur in the savanna woodland of the northeastern parts of South Africa. Dried mopane worms, called masonja, can be found in shops and markets around the country, both prepacked and sold loose (one enamel mugful weighs ±100 g). They are highly nutritious and are a major source of protein in many rural households. My Sepedi in-laws introduced me to this way of preparing masonja, and we always have it when we go back home to Limpopo. Serves 4–6 as a side dish Ingredients Method Cook’s note
Soaking the dried mopane worms in boiling water speeds up the rehydration process. By the end of the soaking time, they will have softened, and any dust should wash out into the water. DM/ ML Liziwe Matloha’s Dinner at Matloha’s is published by Penguin Random House (R300). Visit The Reading List for South African book news – including recipes! – daily. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet