By Fadwa Hodali and Saud Abu Ramadan
May 20, 2021, 9:26 AM – Updated on May 20, 2021, 12:45 PM
Word Count: 468 Moussa Abu Marzouk, deputy chief of the militant Hamas movement that rules Gaza, was cited on the website of Lebanon’s Al-Mayadeen TV on Wednesday as saying that he expects that “a cease-fire will be reached within a day or two.” Israel’s Channel 12, citing unidentified people, reported Thursday that a Friday afternoon truce was shaping up. Israel, Hamas Near Possible Cease-Fire After Biden Pressure Reports of a pending cease-fire have circulated before, but this time, they follow more intense U.S. pressure on Israel to dial back an onslaught that has killed about 230 Palestinians. President Joe Biden’s reluctance to publicly press Israel to end its attacks had set him on a collision course with Democratic congressional allies who wanted him to be more forceful. On Wednesday, he told Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu that he expected a “significant de-escalation” that very day. But the Israeli leader rebuffed the squeeze, and declared himself determined to continue the operation until quiet and security are restored to Israel, where 12 people have died in relentless rocket assaults. Israeli aircraft hammered weapons warehouses, rocket launchers, homes of Hamas officials and the group’s network of underground tunnels, used for combat and logistics. Gaza rocket squads halted their fire for about eight hours before resuming their bombardments mid-morning Thursday. What’s Behind Surging Israeli-Palestinian Violence: QuickTake The violence erupted after weeks of clashes between Palestinians and Israeli security forces in Jerusalem, the holy city at the heart of conflicting sovereignty claims. Hamas fired rockets in Jerusalem’s direction after Israeli security forces stormed a Muslim shrine in east Jerusalem and Israel prepared to evict longtime Palestinian residents from homes in the city’s eastern sector. The rocket fire toward Jerusalem crossed what Israel called a “red line,” and its military embarked upon an operation that’s delivered a harsher blow to the militants’ capabilities than ever before. The violence also spilled over into deadly clashes between Arabs and Jews inside Israel, and between Israeli security forces and Palestinians in the West Bank. While ordinary Palestinians and Israelis have suffered, leaders on both sides emerge from the conflict in a stronger position. The conflict has hollowed out Netanyahu’s rival’s efforts to form a government to unseat him as prospective partners in an alternative coalitions retreated to sectarian camps. And among Palestinians, it has cast Hamas a more effectual fighter against Israel than the rival Palestinian Authority, based in the West Bank and headed by President Mahmoud Abbas. It also gave Hamas bragging rights to have united Palestinians in Gaza, the West Bank and Israel in the struggle against Israel. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 1 What we have here is the classic case of Derek Chauvin (Israel with complicity of the US) with its knee on the neck of a handcuffed George Floyd (Hamas) … claiming George was ‘fighting back’ to breath & therefore atrocities & human rights violations are not only permissible … but justified !