Elderly people wait for vaccinations at Universitas Hospital in Bloemfontein on 24 May 2021. (Photo: Gallo Images / Volksblad / Mlungisi Louw) Daily breakdowns of how vaccination is faring in each province are now available after the Department of Health published more detailed Covid-19 vaccination data for the first time on 25 May. The daily report included a breakdown of how many doses were administered in each province in total as well as on the specific day. It also lists how many people have registered in each province in the healthcare and over-60 categories. However, the data are from the day before the report is published. On 25 May, the data were that of vaccinations completed on 24 May.       Meanwhile, people younger than 60 have been trying to hack the Electronic Vaccination Data System to jump the queue. This is according to the man in charge of the system, Dr Nicholas Crisp. Despite this, the system has not failed, he assured. He spoke to Maverick Citizen’s Estelle Ellis about how people try to trick the system and the lengths his team goes to, to keep them out. Read more here. The Free State is upping the number of vaccination sites in Mangaung. The city’s only vaccination site was closed last week because of service delivery protests. On 26 May, it was vaccinating those over 60 years old at: Boikhuco Old Age Home is vaccinating not only its residents, but also those over 60 living in Bochabela, Seven Days, Matlhomola and Sports from 26 May onwards. The Universitas Academic Hospital vaccinated 540 people between 7.30am and 11.30am on 26 May, according to the province’s health department. In Pretoria, former Deputy Chief Justice Dikgang Moseneke received his first dose of the Pfizer vaccine: Former Deputy Chief Justice Dikgang Moseneke received his COVID-19 jab this morning, 26 May at FF Ribeiro Clinic in Pretoria CBD #vaccinesaveslives #IChooseVacciNation pic.twitter.com/fZKEaNddXX — Gauteng Health (@GautengHealth) May 26, 2021  In the Western Cape, 4,426 residents of 57 old age homes had been given their first dose of the Pfizer vaccine by 26 May. The province has encouraged these facilities to register their residents. It has 300 old age homes. More than 100,000 people were vaccinated in the province by 26 May. However, over 14,000 of those have been vaccinated in Phase 2 and Phase 1B. Provincial authorities reiterated the call for residents to register and wait for an SMS before going to a vaccination site. DM/MC "Information pertaining to Covid-19, vaccines, how to control the spread of the virus and potential treatments is ever-changing. Under the South African Disaster Management Act Regulation 11(5)(c) it is prohibited to publish information through any medium with the intention to deceive people on government measures to address COVID-19. We are therefore disabling the comment section on this article in order to protect both the commenting member and ourselves from potential liability. Should you have additional information that you think we should know, please email letters@dailymaverick.co.za"