Smoke rises as a building collapses after an Israeli air strike hits Al-Jalaa tower, which houses apartments and several media outlets, including the Associated Press and Al Jazeera, in Gaza City, on 15 May 2021. (Photo: EPA-EFE / Mohammed Saber) First published in the Daily Maverick 168 weekly newspaper. You know, I really am trying to take a break from politics purely because it is so hard and wearying to defend truth and justice against people who will just not listen. I can’t engage. When people share horror stories about Palestine, I completely tune out and tune in to Peaches by Justin Bieber in my head instead. He gets them from Georgia by the way. Of course I am upset by the deaths of millions of people over too long a time. Of course my heart bleeds for everyone who has lost a child, a mother, a father, a friend or entire families. And of course, I strongly believe that the bombing of a building that housed media outlets is a hate crime against free speech and the fact that many South African publications are ignoring it and not giving it as much coverage and consideration as it deserves is absolute bullshit. But I am going to use this week’s column as one final attempt to educate anyone who needs a few tips on how and why to support Palestine and what it means to be a person. Because after all, silence is not peace and shit happens when good people do nothing. And who doesn’t want to be a good person? I decided to offer advice in the form of the Ten Commandments. They’re in the Bible, the Quran and the Torah. Look at that. We’re already one step closer to unification. And it’s that simple. But just for good measure, here’s an eleventh: Thou shalt not be an idiot. DM168 This irreverent respite is brought to you by author, journalist and podcast producer Haji Mohamed Dawjee. This story first appeared in our weekly Daily Maverick 168 newspaper which is available for free to Pick n Pay Smart Shoppers at these Pick n Pay stores.  Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet