Salted macadamia and naartjie drizzle cake. (Photo: Tony Jackman)  This recipe accompanies this column Ingredients Melted butter for greasing the cake tin 180 g softened butter 180 g castor sugar 3 XL eggs 125 g self-raising flour 1 tsp baking powder 100 g coarsely salted roasted macadamias, ground in a food processor 3 or 4 naartjies, sliced thinly (or as much as will cover the base and sides of the tin) Zest of 1 naartjie Pinch of ground cloves 80 ml full cream milk Method Make the naartjie syrup (recipe below) and keep it warm. Preheat the oven to 180℃ or 190℃. (My gas oven needs higher; you be the judge of yours.) Grease a springform cake tin on the bottom and sides with melted butter. Line the sides and bottom of the tin with the naartjie slices. (You can push them back to the sides when you spoon in the cake batter.) Cream the butter and castor sugar together in a baking bowl with a wooden spoon or whisk until pale. Sift the flour with the baking powder. Add the eggs 1 at a time, beating after each addition. Fold in the following ingredients in two batches, i.e. half of them first, then half of them again: First fold in half of the flour, then half of the ground macadamias, the pinch of cloves, the grated naartjie zest, half of the milk, and mix it lightly. Don’t overwork it. Now fold in the rest of the flour, the remaining ground macadamias, and the remaining milk, until just combined. No need for more zest or cloves. Spoon into the prepared cake tin, pushing the batter against the naartjie slices to secure them against the sides. Bake for about 40 to 50 minutes or until an inserted skewer comes out clean. Cool for a few minutes in the tin before releasing the springform catch and turning it out onto a wire rack. Just like a tarte tatin, the bottom of the cake becomes the top. Quickly reheat the naartjie syrup glaze and pour it over the top. For the naartjie syrup glaze: ⅔ cup naartjie juice 90 g castor sugar Combine ingredients in a pot and bring to a boil, stirring, until the sugar has dissolved. Continue cooking for about 5 minutes until the syrup turns fairly thick and sticky; if it’s still very runny, cook it a bit longer. It needs to be like hot jam. Keep aside. Reheat before pouring it on top of the turned out cake while it is still warm. DM/TGIFood To enquire about Tony Jackman’s book, foodSTUFF (Human & Rousseau) please email him at tony@dailymaverick.co.za SUBSCRIBE: Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet