T-bone steak cooked with Brazilian pink peppercorns and Funky Ouma black garlic pink salt, served with beetroot purée. Former denizens of the old Café Royal Press Club haunt in Cape Town will recognise the bowl. (Photo: Tony Jackman) Ingredients (Recipe per 1 portion, multiply as necessary) 1 T-bone steak, preferably aged 1 or 2 beetroot, depending on size, peeled 3 garlic cloves, in their husks 2 Tbsp olive oil 2 Tbsp butter 1 tsp Funky Ouma black garlic pink salt Pink peppercorns Salt and black pepper to taste 2 Tbsp crème fraîche Method Preheat the oven to 200℃. Rinse and dry the pink peppercorns, then grind them and pack them onto the steak. Dice the peeled beetroot with 3 garlic cloves in their husks and a little olive oil and roast in the oven until the beetroot is soft. Remove the garlic cloves before they get hard and burn. Remove the beetroot and garlic to a food processor, squeeze out the soft garlic pulp into it, add a splash of olive oil (or the olive oil from the pan), and blend until smooth. Season to taste with a little salt and pepper. Stir in 2 or 3 Tbsp of crème fraîche. Keep aside. Season the steak well with Funky Ouma black garlic pink salt (I love this product and it is rare that I endorse anything commercial) and pack crushed pink peppercorns on it (as much as you like, it’s your steak). Melt butter in a skillet and grill steak until it is done to your liking and still tender. The only way to get this right is to be as watchful as an eagle guarding its young. Remove the steak to a dish to rest in a warm (not too warm) place; you want it to rest, not cook. Serve the steak with the roasted beetroot purée and a potato dish of your choice such as this potato and butternut bake. DM/TGIFood To enquire about Tony Jackman’s book, foodSTUFF (Human & Rousseau) please email him at tony@dailymaverick.co.za SUBSCRIBE: Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 1 Will definitely give it a try.