Capetonians are familiar with the impact of climate change due to the drought we experienced in recent years. But by working together, we reduced water use by 50% in record time to avoid the worst. No other city in the world has managed to achieve this. This kind of collaborative action is what we need to become stronger, more resilient and to help reduce the impacts of climate change. So, Let’s ACT. For a Stronger Cape Town. Tackling climate change requires that we work together. There are many simple actions, some big and some small, that each of us can take to make our city stronger. In support of the growing global momentum to tackle climate change, Cape Town, along with cities in South Africa and worldwide, has committed to working to achieve the ambitious goal of carbon neutrality and climate resilience by 2050. Importantly, reducing global warming is key. These necessary targets can only be reached through significant transitions in urban form, energy sources, transportation and resource efficiency. Along with the Climate Change Strategy, the City is completing a Climate Change Action Plan that sets the pathway towards this goal. The City has in place many programmes that support climate change adaptation, mitigation and climate resilience, and is working towards significantly growing these. In the adaptation and resilience work area, projects include: To reduce our greenhouse gas emissions, our mitigation efforts include: Over the past 10 years, the City’s energy efficiency in municipal operations programme has saved more than 231 GWH of electricity. This is enough electricity to power 35 clinics over 10 years and translates into 229 035 tons of avoided carbon emissions. We’re already taking action, please join us  Carbon neutrality means introducing new technologies to clean up the fuels and activities that cause greenhouse gas emissions and global warming, while enhancing our social, economic and environmental goals. Read more about the City’s Carbon Neutral 2050 commitment. Join us and Let’s ACT. For a Stronger Cape Town. Let’s show the world that we can do it again. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 1 on water : stop piping in other districts’ catchment, crapping in it and dumping it in the sea! Recycle your sewerage.
Store your catchment rain.
Go solar desalination in your space.
Offer tariffs that reward own solar generation Sustainable is not importing solar/wind/water from everywhere else.