Archive Photo: Duhan van der Merwe of Edinburgh Rugby races for the line as he scores the opening try of the game chased by Zach Kibirige of Wasps during the European Rugby Challenge Cup Round 3 match between Edinburgh Rugby and Wasps at Murrayfield Stadium on December 6, 2019 in Edinburgh, Scotland. (Photo by Mark Runnacles/Getty Images) Scotland wing Duhan van der Merwe, who was one of the star performers in the recent Six Nations, has been named in the 37-man 2021 British & Irish Lions squad to face the world champion Springboks in July and August. The George-born wing, who is 1.93m tall and 105kg, played two years for the SA under-18 team and also for the Junior Springboks in 2014. He has been selected with a view to his power and pace causing his former countrymen some discomfort in contact. The squad will be captained by Wales skipper Alun Wyn Jones, who makes his fourth Lion tour and is the only survivor of the last time the Lions toured South Africa in 2009. Jones is the fifth consecutive lock to be named as Lions skipper to South Africa following Willie John McBride (1974), Bill Beaumont (1980), Martin Johnson (1997) and Paul O’Connell (2009). “It’s one of the hardest squads I’ve ever had to put together. Selection, at the end of the day, is just a matter of opinion,” head coach Warren Gatland said. “Everyone will get a start in one of the first three games. If that had happened to me as a player, I would feel like I’m in the shop window. “There is excitement for players named but there is desperate disappointment for some who miss out. We had a four-hour meeting yesterday and added an extra name, so we will take 37 players. I can assure people, we made no decision lightly.” Jones said: “I’m very proud and leading the Lions is a privilege, but initially you want to hear that you are selected. I heard on Sunday when I saw I had a missed call from Gats (Gatland) and I thought I’d better give him a call back.” Several players are named in a Lions squad for a first time, including Josh Adams, Bundee Aki, Chris Harris, Ali Price, Louis Rees-Zammit, Tadhg Beirne, Jack Conan, Zander Fagerson, Iain Henderson, Jonny Hill, Wyn Jones, Andrew Porter, Sam Simmonds, Rory Sutherland and Hamish Watson. “We believe we’ve picked a squad capable of winning a Test series in South Africa,” said Gatland. “Selecting a Lions squad is never easy and, in many ways, this has been the most challenging selection I have been involved in. Over the course of the last three weeks, the coaches and I have rigorously debated each position. “We saw some outstanding performance in the recent Six Nations, so competition for places has been tough with some incredibly tight calls to make. “However, we are very happy with the squad we have assembled and look forward to meeting up in Jersey in just over a month’s time to start our preparation to take on the World Champions. We’ve left out some very talented players which gives an indication to the strength of this squad and we know how important that stand-by list will be. “Being selected for a Lions Tour is the greatest honour for a British and Irish player and I congratulate everyone named today.” DM Squad: Backs (16): Josh Adams (Cardiff Rugby, Wales) – Wing Bundee Aki (Connacht Rugby, Ireland) – Centre Dan Biggar (Northampton Saints, Wales) – Fly-half #821 Elliot Daly (Saracens, England) – Centre #822 Gareth Davies (Scarlets, Wales) – Scrum-half Owen Farrell (Saracens, England) – Fly-half #780 Chris Harris (Gloucester Rugby, Scotland) – Centre Robbie Henshaw (Leinster Rugby, Ireland) – Centre #824 Stuart Hogg (Exeter Chiefs, Scotland) – Full-back #783 Conor Murray (Munster Rugby, Ireland) – Scrum-half #790 Ali Price (Glasgow Warriors, Scotland) – Scrum-half Louis Rees-Zammit (Gloucester Rugby, Wales) – Wing Finn Russell (Racing 92, Scotland) – Fly-half #835 Duhan van der Merwe (Edinburgh Rugby, Scotland) – Wing Anthony Watson (Bath Rugby, England) – Wing #816 Liam Williams (Scarlets, Wales) – Full-back #833 Forwards (21): Tadhg Beirne (Munster Rugby, Ireland) – Second row Jack Conan (Leinster Rugby, Ireland) – Back row Luke Cowan-Dickie (Exeter Chiefs, England) – Hooker Tom Curry (Sale Sharks, England) – Back row Zander Fagerson (Glasgow Warriors, Scotland) – Prop Taulupe Faletau (Bath Rugby, Wales) – Back row #779 Tadhg Furlong (Leinster Rugby, Ireland) – Prop #818 Jamie George (Saracens, England) – Hooker #819 Iain Henderson (Ulster Rugby, Ireland) – Second row #808 Jonny Hill (Exeter Chiefs, England) – Second row Maro Itoje (Saracens, England) – Second row #825 Alun Wyn Jones (Ospreys, Wales) (Captain) – Second row #761 Wyn Jones (Scarlets, Wales) – Prop Courtney Lawes (Northampton Saints, England) – Second row #826 Ken Owens (Scarlets, Wales) – Hooker #829 Andrew Porter (Leinster Rugby, Ireland) – Prop Sam Simmonds (Exeter Chiefs, England) – Back row Rory Sutherland (Edinburgh Rugby, Scotland) – Prop Justin Tipuric (Ospreys, Wales) – Back row #786 Mako Vunipola (Saracens, England) – Prop #787 Hamish Watson (Edinburgh Rugby, Scotland) – Back row Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet