Mielie and rosemary braai bread. (Photo: Tony Jackman) This bread is a perfect accompaniment to Carbonada Criolla Ingredients 1 kg white bread flour 10 g sachet instant yeast 4 tsp sugar 1 tsp salt 2 cups lukewarm water (more or less, you need to feel and assess when the dough is right) 2 Tbsp olive oil Kernels of 1 mielie (corn on the cob) 1 Tbsp rosemary needles, chopped Method Have braai coals available, enough to have coals around the base of the pot for an hour, with a few more to go on the lid. Sift the flour into a large bowl and add the yeast and sugar. Stir in the salt and add the rosemary needles and corn kernels. Add lukewarm water a little at a time, while kneading the dough, until it is all combined. Now add the 2 Tbsp olive oil and knead until the dough forms a ball. Leave it in the bowl and cover with a damp towel. Put it in a warm place to rise for 20 minutes. Knead it for two minutes, form into a ball again and rise in a warm place for 50 minutes, covered with the damp cloth again. Turn it out into a greased heavy iron pot with a lid, surround the edges of the base with hot coals, put a few coals on the lid, and cook for an hour. Top up the coals as necessary. DM/TGIFood To enquire about Tony Jackman’s book, foodSTUFF (Human & Rousseau) please email him at tony@dailymaverick.co.za SUBSCRIBE: Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet